A LOST DAY.

BY EDGAR FAWCETT.


"My Family," John Dalrymple would say, "have the strange failing (that
is, nearly all of them except myself, on the paternal side) of----"

And then somebody would always try to interrupt him. At the Gramercy,
the small but charming club of which he had been for years an honored
member, they made a point of interrupting him when he began on his
family failing. Not a few of them held to the belief that it was a myth
of Dalrymple's imagination. Still, others argued, all of the clan except
John himself had been a queer lot; there was no real certainty that they
had not done extraordinary acts. Meanwhile, apart from his desire to
delve among ancestral records and repeat tales which had been told many
times before, he was a genuine favorite with his friends. But that
series of family anecdotes remained a standing joke.

They all pitied him when it became known that his engagement to the
pretty winsome widow, Mrs. Carrington, was definitely broken. He was
past forty now, and had not been known to pay serious court to any woman
before in at least ten years. Of course Mrs. Carrington was rich. But
then her money could not have attracted Dalrymple, for he was rich
himself, in spite of his plain way of living there in that small
Twenty-second Street basement house.

But the widow's money had doubtless lured to her side the gentleman who
had cut poor Dalrymple out. A number of years ago, when this little
occurrence which we are chronicling took place, it was not so easy as it
is now to make sure of a foreigner's credentials and antecedents. The
Count de Pommereul, a reputed French nobleman of high position, had
managed to get into the Gramercy as a six-months' member, and had
managed also to cross the thresholds of numerous select New York
drawing-rooms. At the very period of his introduction to Mrs. Carrington
her engagement with Dalrymple had already become publicly announced.
Then, in a few weeks, society received a shock. Dalrymple was thrown
over, and it transpired that the brilliant young widow was betrothed to
the Count.

Dalrymple, calm and self-contained, had nothing to say on the subject of
why he had received such shabby treatment, and nobody ventured to
interrogate him. Some people believed in the Count, others thought that
there was a ring of falsity about him, for all his frame was so
elegantly slender and supple, for all his mustache was so glossily dark,
and his eyes so richly lustrous. Dalrymple meanwhile hid his wound, met
the Count constantly at the Club, though no longer even exchanging bows
with him, and--worked at his revenge in secret as a beaver works at the
building of his winter ranch. He succeeded, too, in getting superb
materials for that revenge. They surprised even himself when a few
relatives and friends in Paris mailed him appalling documentary evidence
as to what sort of a character this Count really was. There is no doubt
that he now held in his hand a thunderbolt, and had only to hurl it when
he pleased.

He did not tell a single soul what he had learned. The thought of just
how he should act haunted him for several days. One evening he went home
from the club a little earlier than usual, and tossed restlessly for a
good while after going to bed. When sleep came it found him still
irresolute as to what course he should take.

It seemed to him that he had now a succession of dreams, but he could
recall none of them on awaking. And he awoke in a peculiar way. There
was yet no hint of dawn in the room, and only the light from his gas,
turned down to a very dim star. He was sitting bolt upright in bed, and
feverish, fatigued sensations oppressed him. "What have I been
dreaming?" he asked himself again and again. But as only a confused
jumble of memories answered him, he sank back upon the pillows, and was
soon buried in slumber.

It was past nine o'clock in the morning when he next awoke. He felt
decidedly better. Both the feverishness and the fatigue had left him. He
went to the club and breakfasted there. It was almost empty of members,
as small clubs are apt to be at that hour of the morning. But in the
hall he met his old friend Langworth and bowed to him. Langworth, who
was rather near-sighted, gave a sudden start and a stare. "How odd,"
thought Dalrymple, as he passed on into the reading-room, "I hope
there's nothing unexpected about my personal appearance." Just at the
doorway of the room he met another old friend, Summerson, a man
extremely strict about all matters of propriety. Summerson saw him and
then plainly made believe that he had not seen. As they moved by one
another Dalrymple said lightly, "Good-morning, old chap. How's your
gout?"

Summerson, who was very tall and excessively dignified, gave a comic
squirm. Then his eyelids fluttered and with the tips of his lips he
murmured, "Better," as he glided along.

"Pooh," said Dalrymple to himself. "Getting touchy, I suppose, in his
old age. How longevity disagrees with some of us mortals."

He nearly always took a bottle of seltzer before breakfast, and this
morning old Andrew (a servant who had been in the club many years)
poured it out for him.

"I hope you're all right again this mornin', sorr," said Andrew with his
Celtic accent and in an affable half whisper.

"All right, Andrew," was the reply. "Why, you must be thinking of some
one else. I haven't been ill. My health has been excellent for a long
time past."

"Yes, sorr," said Andrew, lowering his eyes and respectfully retiring.

That last "Yes, sorr," had a dubious note about its delivery that almost
made Dalrymple call the faithful old fellow back and further question
him. "All right again?" As if he had ever been all wrong! Oh, well, poor
Andrew was ageing; others had remarked that fact months ago.

A different servant came to announce breakfast. There were only about
five men in the dining-room as Dalrymple entered it. All of them gazed
at him in an unusual way, or had late events led him to think that they
did so? At the table nearest him sat Everdell, one of the jolliest men
in the club, a person whose face was nearly always wreathed in smiles.

"Good-morning!" said Dalrymple, as he caught Everdell's eye!

"Good-morning!" The tones were replete with mild consternation, and the
look that went with them was smileless to the degree of actual gloom.
Then Everdell, who had just finished his breakfast, rose and drew near
to Dalrymple.

"'Pon my word," he said, "I'm delighted to see you all right again so
soon."

"All right again so soon?" was the reply. "What in mercy's name do you
mean?"

"Oh, my dear old fellow," began Everdell, fumbling with his watch-chain,
"it was pretty bad, you know, yesterday."

"Pretty--bad--yesterday?"

"I saw you in the morning, and for an hour or so in the afternoon.
Perhaps no one would have noticed it if you hadn't stayed here all day,
and poured those confidences into people's ears about De Pommereul. You
didn't appear to have drank a drop in the club; there's the funny part
of it. You went out several times, though, and came back again. All that
you had to drink (except some wine here at dinner, you remember) you
must have got outside. I wasn't here at ten o'clock when De Pommereul
came in. I'm glad I wasn't. You must have been dreadful. If Summerson
and Joyce hadn't rushed in between you and the Count, heaven knows what
would have happened. As it is----"

At this point Dalrymple broke in with cold harshness: "Look here,
Everdell, I always disliked practical jokes, and I've known for a number
of years that you're given to them. You've never attempted to make me
your butt before, however, and you'll have the kindness to discontinue
any such proceeding now."

Everdell drew back for a moment, frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and
then muttering, "Oh, if you're going to put it in that way," strode
quickly out of the dining-room.

Dalrymple scarcely ate a morsel of breakfast. After he had gulped down
some hot coffee he repaired to the reading-room. As he re-entered it a
waiter handed him several letters. One, which he opened first, was
marked "immediate," and had been sent him from his own house by an
intelligent and devoted woman servant there, who had been for a long
period in his employ. This letter made poor Dalrymple's head swim as he
read it. Written and signed by Mr. Summerson himself, as chairman of the
house committee of the club, it ordered him to appear that same evening
before a meeting of the governors and answer to a charge of disorderly
conduct on the previous night. Then it went on to state that he
(Dalrymple) had been seen throughout the previous day at the club in a
state of evident intoxication, and had, finally, between the hours of 10
and 11 P. M., accosted and grossly insulted the Count de Pommereul in
the main drawing-room of the Gramercy.

"Disorderly conduct," "evident intoxication," "grossly insulted the
Count de Pommereul." These words were trembling on Dalrymple's lips as
he presently approached Summerson himself, the very gentleman who had
signed the letter, and who stood in the hall, arrayed for the street.

"What--what does it all mean?" gasped Dalrymple. "I--I never was
intoxicated in my life, Lawrence Summerson; you ought to know that! I
played euchre last night, up in the card-room, from nine o'clock till
twelve, with Ogden and Folsom and yourself. If there's any practical
joke being got up against me, for God's sake----"

"Wait a minute, please," said Summerson. He went back into the
coat-room, disarrayed himself of his street wraps, and finally joined
Dalrymple. His first words, low and grave, ran thus: "Can it be possible
you don't recollect that our game of euchre was played the night before
last and not last night?" Then he went with Dalrymple into a corner of
the reading room, and they talked together for a good while.

Dalrymple went back to his home that day in a mental whirl. It still
wanted a number of hours before the Governing Committee would meet. He
had lost a day out of his life--there could be no doubt of that. If he
had moved about the Club at all yesterday with a drunken manner,
reviling De Pommereul to everybody who would lend him an ear--if he had
afterward met De Pommereul in the Club and directed toward him in loud
and furious tones a perfect torrent of accusation--he himself was
completely, blankly ignorant.

For a good while he sat quite still and thought. Then he summoned Ann,
the elderly and very trustworthy Ann, who had been his dear mother's
maid, and was now his housekeeper. He questioned Ann, and after
dismissing her he pondered her answers. Three times yesterday she had
seen him, and regarding his appearance Ann had her distinct opinions.

Suddenly a light flashed upon Dalrymple while he sat alone and brooded.
He sprang up and a cry, half of awe, half of gladness, left his lips.
The baffling problem had been solved!

That evening he presented himself before the Governing Committee. All
assembled were sorry for him. Of course, punishment must be dealt, but
for an old and popular member like Dalrymple it must not be expulsion.
The general feeling of the Club had indeed already been gauged, and it
was in favor of suspension for six months or a year at the farthest.

Dalrymple, however, was determined that he should be visited with no
punishment at all. And he meant to state why.

The judges, as he faced them, all looked politely grim. The President,
after a few suave preliminaries, asked Dalrymple if he had anything to
say concerning the charges preferred against him. Dalrymple then
proceeded to speak with a clear voice and composed demeanor.

His first sentences electrified his hearers. "I have no possible
recollection of yesterday," he began, "and it is precisely as much of a
lost day to me as though I had lain chloroformed for twenty-four hours.
On Wednesday night I returned home from this club and went to rest. I
never really woke until Friday, possibly a little while after midnight,
and then within my own bed. On Thursday morning I must have risen in a
state of somnambulism, hypnotism, mental aberration, whatever you
please, and not come to myself until Thursday had passed, and I had once
more retired. Of what yesterday occurred I therefore claim to have been
the irresponsible agent, and to have become so through no fault of my
own. I am completely innocent of the misdemeanors charged against me,
and I now solemnly swear this, on my word of honor as a gentleman."

Here Dalrymple paused. The members of the committee interchanged glances
amid profound silence. On some faces doubt could be read, but on others
its veriest opposite. The intense stillness had become painful when
Dalrymple spoke again.

"I had hoped that I should escape throughout my own lifetime all
visitations of this distressing kind. My grandfather and two of my
uncles not only walked in their sleep to an alarming degree, but were
each subject to strange conditions of mind, in which acts were performed
by them that they could not possibly remember afterward." Here the
speaker paused, soon continuing, however, in a lower and more reflective
tone:

"Yes, my family have had the strange failing (that is, nearly all of
them except myself, on the paternal side) of----"

But he said no more. The tension was loosened, and a great roar of
laughter rose from the whole committee. How often every man there had
joked him about that marvelous budget of stories which he infallibly
began one way and one way only! And when the familiar formula sounded
forth, it was all the funnier to those who heard it because of the
solemn, judicial circumstances in which it again met their hearing.

The plaintiff was honorably acquitted. As for De Pommereul, as every
word that Dalrymple had said concerning his past life in France happened
to be perfectly true, the Count never reappeared at the Gramercy. His
engagement with Mrs. Carrington was soon afterward broken off by the
lady herself, and for a good while it was rumored that this lady had
repentantly made it optional with Dalrymple whether he should once more
become her accepted sweetheart.

But Dalrymple remained a bachelor. He is quite an old man now, yet he
may be found in the card-room of the Gramercy nearly every evening. He
is very willing to tell you the story of his "lost day" if you ask him
courteously for it, and not in any strain of fun-poking; but he attempts
no more voluntary recitals on the subject of his "family's" maladies or
mishaps.
