






VII

THE SAFETY MATCH[E]

ANTON CHEKHOV


I

On the morning of October 6, 1885, in the office of the Inspector of
Police of the second division of S-- District, there appeared a
respectably dressed young man, who announced that his master, Marcus
Ivanovitch Klausoff, a retired officer of the Horse Guards, separated
from his wife, had been murdered. While making this announcement the
young man was white and terribly agitated. His hands trembled and his
eyes were full of terror.

"Whom have I the honour of addressing?" asked the inspector.

"Psyekoff, Lieutenant Klausoff's agent; agriculturist and mechanician!"

The inspector and his deputy, on visiting the scene of the occurrence in
company with Psyekoff, found the following: Near the wing in which
Klausoff had lived was gathered a dense crowd. The news of the murder
had sped swift as lightning through the neighbourhood, and the
peasantry, thanks to the fact that the day was a holiday, had hurried
together from all the neighbouring villages. There was much commotion
and talk. Here and there, pale, tear-stained faces were seen. The door
of Klausoff's bedroom was found locked. The key was inside.

"It is quite clear that the scoundrels got in by the window!" said
Psyekoff as they examined the door.

They went to the garden, into which the bedroom window opened. The
window looked dark and ominous. It was covered by a faded green curtain.
One corner of the curtain was slightly turned up, which made it possible
to look into the bedroom.

"Did any of you look into the window?" asked the inspector.

"Certainly not, your worship!" answered Ephraim, the gardener, a little
gray-haired old man, who looked like a retired sergeant. "Who's going to
look in, if all their bones are shaking?"

"Ah, Marcus Ivanovitch, Marcus Ivanovitch!" sighed the inspector,
looking at the window, "I told you you would come to a bad end! I told
the dear man, but he wouldn't listen! Dissipation doesn't bring any
good!"

"Thanks to Ephraim," said Psyekoff; "but for him, we would never have
guessed. He was the first to guess that something was wrong. He comes to
me this morning, and says: 'Why is the master so long getting up? He
hasn't left his bedroom for a whole week!' The moment he said that, it
was just as if someone had hit me with an axe. The thought flashed
through my mind, 'We haven't had a sight of him since last Saturday, and
to-day is Sunday'! Seven whole days--not a doubt of it!"

"Ay, poor fellow!" again sighed the inspector. "He was a clever fellow,
finely educated, and kind-hearted at that! And in society, nobody could
touch him! But he was a waster, God rest his soul! I was prepared for
anything since he refused to live with Olga Petrovna. Poor thing, a good
wife, but a sharp tongue! Stephen!" the inspector called to one of his
deputies, "go over to my house this minute, and send Andrew to the
captain to lodge an information with him! Tell him that Marcus
Ivanovitch has been murdered. And run over to the orderly; why should he
sit there, kicking his heels? Let him come here! And go as fast as you
can to the examining magistrate, Nicholas Yermolaiyevitch. Tell him to
come over here! Wait; I'll write him a note!"

The inspector posted sentinels around the wing, wrote a letter to the
examining magistrate, and then went over to the director's for a glass
of tea. Ten minutes later he was sitting on a stool, carefully nibbling
a lump of sugar, and swallowing the scalding tea.

"There you are!" he was saying to Psyekoff; "there you are! A noble by
birth! a rich man--a favourite of the gods, you may say, as Pushkin has
it, and what did he come to? He drank and dissipated and--there you
are--he's murdered."

After a couple of hours the examining magistrate drove up. Nicholas
Yermolaiyevitch Chubikoff--for that was the magistrate's name--was a
tall, fleshy old man of sixty, who had been wrestling with the duties of
his office for a quarter of a century. Everybody in the district knew
him as an honest man, wise, energetic, and in love with his work. He was
accompanied to the scene of the murder by his inveterate companion,
fellow worker, and secretary, Dukovski, a tall young fellow of
twenty-six.

"Is it possible, gentlemen?" cried Chubikoff, entering Psyekoff's room,
and quickly shaking hands with everyone. "Is it possible? Marcus
Ivanovitch? Murdered? No! It is impossible! Im-poss-i-ble!"

"Go in there!" sighed the inspector.

"Lord, have mercy on us! Only last Friday I saw him at the fair in
Farabankoff. I had a drink of vodka with him, save the mark!"

"Go in there!" again sighed the inspector.

They sighed, uttered exclamations of horror, drank a glass of tea each,
and went to the wing.

"Get back!" the orderly cried to the peasants.

Going to the wing, the examining magistrate began his work by examining
the bedroom door. The door proved to be of pine, painted yellow, and was
uninjured. Nothing was found which could serve as a clew. They had to
break in the door.

"Everyone not here on business is requested to keep away!" said the
magistrate, when, after much hammering and shaking, the door yielded to
axe and chisel. "I request this, in the interest of the investigation.
Orderly, don't let anyone in!"

Chubikoff, his assistant, and the inspector opened the door, and
hesitatingly, one after the other, entered the room. Their eyes met the
following sight: Beside the single window stood the big wooden bed with
a huge feather mattress. On the crumpled feather bed lay a tumbled,
crumpled quilt. The pillow, in a cotton pillow-case, also much crumpled,
was dragging on the floor. On the table beside the bed lay a silver
watch and a silver twenty-kopeck piece. Beside them lay some sulphur
matches. Beside the bed, the little table, and the single chair, there
was no furniture in the room. Looking under the bed, the inspector saw a
couple of dozen empty bottles, an old straw hat, and a quart of vodka.
Under the table lay one top boot, covered with dust. Casting a glance
around the room, the magistrate frowned and grew red in the face.

"Scoundrels!" he muttered, clenching his fists.

"And where is Marcus Ivanovitch?" asked Dukovski in a low voice.

"Mind your own business!" Chubikoff answered roughly. "Be good enough to
examine the floor! This is not the first case of the kind I have had to
deal with! Eugraph Kuzmitch," he said, turning to the inspector, and
lowering his voice, "in 1870 I had another case like this. But you must
remember it--the murder of the merchant Portraitoff. It was just the
same there. The scoundrels murdered him, and dragged the corpse out
through the window--"

Chubikoff went up to the window, pulled the curtain to one side, and
carefully pushed the window. The window opened.

"It opens, you see! It wasn't fastened. Hm! There are tracks under the
window. Look! There is the track of a knee! Somebody got in there. We
must examine the window thoroughly."

"There is nothing special to be found on the floor," said Dukovski. "No
stains or scratches. The only thing I found was a struck safety match.
Here it is! So far as I remember, Marcus Ivanovitch did not smoke. And
he always used sulphur matches, never safety matches. Perhaps this
safety match may serve as a clew!"

"Oh, do shut up!" cried the magistrate deprecatingly. "You go on about
your match! I can't abide these dreamers! Instead of chasing matches,
you had better examine the bed!"

After a thorough examination of the bed, Dukovski reported:

"There are no spots, either of blood or of anything else. There are
likewise no new torn places. On the pillow there are signs of teeth. The
quilt is stained with something which looks like beer and smells like
beer. The general aspect of the bed gives grounds for thinking that a
struggle took place on it."

"I know there was a struggle, without your telling me! You are not being
asked about a struggle. Instead of looking for struggles, you had
better--"

"Here is one top boot, but there is no sign of the other."

"Well, and what of that?"

"It proves that they strangled him, while he was taking his boots off.
He hadn't time to take the second boot off when--"

"There you go!--and how do you know they strangled him?"

"There are marks of teeth on the pillow. The pillow itself is badly
crumpled, and thrown a couple of yards from the bed."

"Listen to his foolishness! Better come into the garden. You would be
better employed examining the garden than digging around here. I can do
that without you!"

When they reached the garden they began by examining the grass. The
grass under the window was crushed and trampled. A bushy burdock growing
under the window close to the wall was also trampled. Dukovski succeeded
in finding on it some broken twigs and a piece of cotton wool. On the
upper branches were found some fine hairs of dark blue wool.

"What colour was his last suit?" Dukovski asked Psyekoff.

"Yellow crash."

"Excellent! You see they wore blue!"

A few twigs of the burdock were cut off, and carefully wrapped in paper
by the investigators. At this point Police Captain Artsuybasheff
Svistakovski and Dr. Tyutyeff arrived. The captain bade them "Good day!"
and immediately began to satisfy his curiosity. The doctor, a tall, very
lean man, with dull eyes, a long nose, and a pointed chin, without
greeting anyone or asking about anything, sat down on a log, sighed, and
began:

"The Servians are at war again! What in heaven's name can they want now?
Austria, it's all your doing!"

The examination of the window from the outside did not supply any
conclusive data. The examination of the grass and the bushes nearest to
the window yielded a series of useful clews. For example, Dukovski
succeeded in discovering a long, dark streak, made up of spots, on the
grass, which led some distance into the centre of the garden. The streak
ended under one of the lilac bushes in a dark brown stain. Under this
same lilac bush was found a top boot, which turned out to be the fellow
of the boot already found in the bedroom.

"That is a blood stain made some time ago," said Dukovski, examining the
spot.

At the word "blood" the doctor rose, and going over lazily, looked at
the spot.

"Yes, it is blood!" he muttered.

"That shows he wasn't strangled, if there was blood," said Chubikoff,
looking sarcastically at Dukovski.

"They strangled him in the bedroom; and here, fearing he might come
round again, they struck him a blow with some sharp-pointed instrument.
The stain under the bush proves that he lay there a considerable time,
while they were looking about for some way of carrying him out of the
garden."

"Well, and how about the boot?"

"The boot confirms completely my idea that they murdered him while he
was taking his boots off before going to bed. He had already taken off
one boot, and the other, this one here, he had only had time to take
half off. The half-off boot came off of itself, while the body was
dragged over, and fell--"

"There's a lively imagination for you!" laughed Chubikoff. "He goes on
and on like that! When will you learn enough to drop your deductions?
Instead of arguing and deducing, it would be much better if you took
some of the blood-stained grass for analysis!"

When they had finished their examination, and drawn a plan of the
locality, the investigators went to the director's office to write their
report and have breakfast. While they were breakfasting they went on
talking:

"The watch, the money, and so on--all untouched--" Chubikoff began,
leading off the talk, "show as clearly as that two and two are four
that the murder was not committed for the purpose of robbery."

"The murder was committed by an educated man!" insisted Dukovski.

"What evidence have you of that?"

"The safety match proves that to me, for the peasants hereabouts are not
yet acquainted with safety matches. Only the landowners use them, and by
no means all of them. And it is evident that there was not one murderer,
but at least three. Two held him, while one killed him. Klausoff was
strong, and the murderers must have known it!"

"What good would his strength be, supposing he was asleep?"

"The murderers came on him while he was taking off his boots. If he was
taking off his boots, that proves that he wasn't asleep!"

"Stop inventing your deductions! Better eat!"

"In my opinion, your worship," said the gardener Ephraim, setting the
samovar on the table, "it was nobody but Nicholas who did this dirty
trick!"

"Quite possible," said Psyekoff.

"And who is Nicholas?"

"The master's valet, your worship," answered Ephraim. "Who else could it
be? He's a rascal, your worship! He's a drunkard and a blackguard, the
like of which Heaven should not permit! He always took the master his
vodka and put the master to bed. Who else could it be? And I also
venture to point out to your worship, he once boasted at the public
house that he would kill the master! It happened on account of Aquilina,
the woman, you know. He was making up to a soldier's widow. She pleased
the master; the master made friends with her himself, and
Nicholas--naturally, he was mad! He is rolling about drunk in the
kitchen now. He is crying, and telling lies, saying he is sorry for the
master--"

The examining magistrate ordered Nicholas to be brought. Nicholas, a
lanky young fellow, with a long, freckled nose, narrow-chested, and
wearing an old jacket of his master's, entered Psyekoff's room, and
bowed low before the magistrate. His face was sleepy and tear-stained.
He was tipsy and could hardly keep his feet.

"Where is your master?" Chubikoff asked him.

"Murdered! your worship!"

As he said this, Nicholas blinked and began to weep.

"We know he was murdered. But where is he now? Where is his body?"

"They say he was dragged out of the window and buried in the garden!"

"Hum! The results of the investigation are known in the kitchen
already!--That's bad! Where were you, my good fellow, the night the
master was murdered? Saturday night, that is."

Nicholas raised his head, stretched his neck, and began to think.

"I don't know, your worship," he said. "I was drunk and don't remember."

"An alibi!" whispered Dukovski, smiling, and rubbing his hands.

"So-o! And why is there blood under the master's window?"

Nicholas jerked his head up and considered.

"Hurry up!" said the Captain of Police.

"Right away! That blood doesn't amount to anything, your worship! I was
cutting a chicken's throat. I was doing it quite simply, in the usual
way, when all of a sudden it broke away and started to run. That is
where the blood came from."

Ephraim declared that Nicholas did kill a chicken every evening, and
always in some new place, but that nobody ever heard of a half-killed
chicken running about the garden, though of course it wasn't impossible.

"An alibi," sneered Dukovski; "and what an asinine alibi!"

"Did you know Aquilina?"

"Yes, your worship, I know her."

"And the master cut you out with her?"

"Not at all. _He_ cut me out--Mr. Psyekoff there, Ivan Mikhailovitch;
and the master cut Ivan Mikhailovitch out. That is how it was."

Psyekoff grew confused and began to scratch his left eye. Dukovski
looked at him attentively, noted his confusion, and started. He noticed
that the director had dark blue trousers, which he had not observed
before. The trousers reminded him of the dark blue threads found on the
burdock. Chubikoff in his turn glanced suspiciously at Psyekoff.

"Go!" he said to Nicholas. "And now permit me to put a question to you,
Mr. Psyekoff. Of course you were here last Saturday evening?"

"Yes! I had supper with Marcus Ivanovitch about ten o'clock."

"And afterward?"

"Afterward--afterward--Really, I do not remember," stammered Psyekoff.
"I had a good deal to drink at supper. I don't remember when or where I
went to sleep. Why are you all looking at me like that, as if I was the
murderer?"

"Where were you when you woke up?"

"I was in the servants' kitchen, lying behind the stove! They can all
confirm it. How I got behind the stove I don't know--"

"Do not get agitated. Did you know Aquilina?"

"There's nothing extraordinary about that--"

"She first liked you and then preferred Klausoff?"

"Yes. Ephraim, give us some more mushrooms! Do you want some more tea,
Eugraph Kuzmitch?"

A heavy, oppressive silence began and lasted fully five minutes.
Dukovski silently kept his piercing eyes fixed on Psyekoff's pale face.
The silence was finally broken by the examining magistrate:

"We must go to the house and talk with Maria Ivanovna, the sister of the
deceased. Perhaps she may be able to supply some clews."

Chubikoff and his assistant expressed their thanks for the breakfast,
and went toward the house. They found Klausoff's sister, Maria Ivanovna,
an old maid of forty-five, at prayer before the big case of family
icons. When she saw the portfolios in her guests' hands, and their
official caps, she grew pale.

"Let me begin by apologizing for disturbing, so to speak, your
devotions," began the gallant Chubikoff, bowing and scraping. "We have
come to you with a request. Of course, you have heard already. There is
a suspicion that your dear brother, in some way or other, has been
murdered. The will of God, you know. No one can escape death, neither
czar nor ploughman. Could you not help us with some clew, some
explanation--?"

"Oh, don't ask me!" said Maria Ivanovna, growing still paler, and
covering her face with her hands. "I can tell you nothing. Nothing! I
beg you! I know nothing--What can I do? Oh, no! no!--not a word about my
brother! If I die, I won't say anything!"

Maria Ivanovna began to weep, and left the room. The investigators
looked at each other, shrugged their shoulders, and beat a retreat.

"Confound the woman!" scolded Dukovski, going out of the house. "It is
clear she knows something, and is concealing it! And the chambermaid
has a queer expression too! Wait, you wretches! We'll ferret it all
out!"

In the evening Chubikoff and his deputy, lit on their road by the pale
moon, wended their way homeward. They sat in their carriage and thought
over the results of the day. Both were tired and kept silent. Chubikoff
was always unwilling to talk while travelling, and the talkative
Dukovski remained silent, to fall in with the elder man's humour. But at
the end of their journey the deputy could hold in no longer, and said:

"It is quite certain," he said, "that Nicholas had something to do with
the matter. _Non dubitandum est!_ You can see by his face what sort of a
case he is! His alibi betrays him, body and bones. But it is also
certain that he did not set the thing going. He was only the stupid
hired tool. You agree? And the humble Psyekoff was not without some
slight share in the matter. His dark blue breeches, his agitation, his
lying behind the stove in terror after the murder, his alibi
and--Aquilina--"

"'Grind away, Emilian; it's your week!' So, according to you, whoever
knew Aquilina is the murderer! Hothead! You ought to be sucking a
bottle, and not handling affairs! You were one of Aquilina's admirers
yourself--does it follow that you are implicated too?"

"Aquilina was cook in your house for a month. I am saying nothing about
that! The night before that Saturday I was playing cards with you, and
saw you, otherwise I should be after you too! It isn't the woman that
matters, old chap! It is the mean, nasty, low spirit of jealousy that
matters. The retiring young man was not pleased when they got the better
of him, you see! His vanity, don't you see? He wanted revenge. Then,
those thick lips of his suggest passion. So there you have it: wounded
self-love and passion. That is quite enough motive for a murder. We have
two of them in our hands; but who is the third? Nicholas and Psyekoff
held him, but who smothered him? Psyekoff is shy, timid, an all-round
coward. And Nicholas would not know how to smother with a pillow. His
sort use an axe or a club. Some third person did the smothering; but who
was it?"

Dukovski crammed his hat down over his eyes and pondered. He remained
silent until the carriage rolled up to the magistrate's door.

"Eureka!" he said, entering the little house and throwing off his
overcoat. "Eureka, Nicholas Yermolaiyevitch! The only thing I can't
understand is, how it did not occur to me sooner! Do you know who the
third person was?"

"Oh, for goodness sake, shut up! There is supper! Sit down to your
evening meal!"

The magistrate and Dukovski sat down to supper. Dukovski poured himself
out a glass of vodka, rose, drew himself up, and said, with sparkling
eyes:

"Well, learn that the third person, who acted in concert with that
scoundrel Psyekoff, and did the smothering, was a woman! Yes-s! I
mean--the murdered man's sister, Maria Ivanovna!"

Chubikoff choked over his vodka, and fixed his eyes on Dukovski.

"You aren't--what's-its-name? Your head isn't what-do-you-call-it? You
haven't a pain in it?"

"I am perfectly well! Very well, let us say that I am crazy; but how do
you explain her confusion when we appeared? How do you explain her
unwillingness to give us any information? Let us admit that these are
trifles. Very well! All right! But remember their relations. She
detested her brother. She never forgave him for living apart from his
wife. She of the Old Faith, while in her eyes he is a godless
profligate. There is where the germ of her hate was hatched. They say he
succeeded in making her believe that he was an angel of Satan. He even
went in for spiritualism in her presence!"

"Well, what of that?"

"You don't understand? She, as a member of the Old Faith, murdered him
through fanaticism. It was not only that she was putting to death a
weed, a profligate--she was freeing the world of an anti-christ!--and
there, in her opinion, was her service, her religious achievement! Oh,
you don't know those old maids of the Old Faith. Read Dostoyevsky! And
what does Lyeskoff say about them, or Petcherski? It was she, and nobody
else, even if you cut me open. She smothered him! O treacherous woman!
wasn't that the reason why she was kneeling before the icons, when we
came in, just to take our attention away? 'Let me kneel down and pray,'
she said to herself, 'and they will think I am tranquil and did not
expect them!' That is the plan of all novices in crime, Nicholas
Yermolaiyevitch, old pal! My dear old man, won't you intrust this
business to me? Let me personally bring it through! Friend, I began it
and I will finish it!"

Chubikoff shook his head and frowned.

"We know how to manage difficult matters ourselves," he said; "and your
business is not to push yourself in where you don't belong. Write from
dictation when you are dictated to; that is your job!"

Dukovski flared up, banged the door, and disappeared.

"Clever rascal!" muttered Chubikoff, glancing after him. "Awfully
clever! But too much of a hothead. I must buy him a cigar case at the
fair as a present."

The next day, early in the morning, a young man with a big head and a
pursed-up mouth, who came from Klausoff's place, was introduced to the
magistrate's office. He said he was the shepherd Daniel, and brought a
very interesting piece of information.

"I was a bit drunk," he said. "I was with my pal till midnight. On my
way home, as I was drunk, I went into the river for a bath. I was taking
a bath, when I looked up. Two men were walking along the dam, carrying
something black. 'Shoo!' I cried at them. They got scared, and went off
like the wind toward Makareff's cabbage garden. Strike me dead, if they
weren't carrying away the master!"

That same day, toward evening, Psyekoff and Nicholas were arrested and
brought under guard to the district town. In the town they were
committed to the cells of the prison.

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote E: Reprinted by permission of the Review of Reviews Co.]


II

A fortnight passed.

It was morning. The magistrate Nicholas Yermolaiyevitch was sitting in
his office before a green table, turning over the papers of the
"Klausoff case"; Dukovski was striding restlessly up and down like a
wolf in a cage.

"You are convinced of the guilt of Nicholas and Psyekoff," he said,
nervously plucking at his young beard. "Why will you not believe in the
guilt of Maria Ivanovna? Are there not proofs enough for you?"

"I don't say I am not convinced. I am convinced, but somehow I don't
believe it! There are no real proofs, but just a kind of
philosophizing--fanaticism, this and that--"

"You can't do without an axe and bloodstained sheets. Those jurists!
Very well, I'll prove it to you! You will stop sneering at the
psychological side of the affair! To Siberia with your Maria Ivanovna!
I will prove it! If philosophy is not enough for you, I have something
substantial for you. It will show you how correct my philosophy is. Just
give me permission--"

"What are you going on about?"

"About the safety match! Have you forgotten it? I haven't! I am going to
find out who struck it in the murdered man's room. It was not Nicholas
that struck it; it was not Psyekoff, for neither of them had any matches
when they were examined; it was the third person, Maria Ivanovna. I will
prove it to you. Just give me permission to go through the district to
find out."

"That's enough! Sit down. Let us go on with the examination."

Dukovski sat down at a little table, and plunged his long nose in a
bundle of papers.

"Bring in Nicholas Tetekhoff!" cried the examining magistrate.

They brought Nicholas in. Nicholas was pale and thin as a rail. He was
trembling.

"Tetekhoff!" began Chubikoff. "In 1879 you were tried in the Court of
the First Division, convicted of theft, and sentenced to imprisonment.
In 1882 you were tried a second time for theft, and were again
imprisoned. We know all--"

Astonishment was depicted on Nicholas's face. The examining magistrate's
omniscience startled him. But soon his expression of astonishment
changed to extreme indignation. He began to cry and requested
permission to go and wash his face and quiet down. They led him away.

"Bring in Psyekoff!" ordered the examining magistrate.

They brought in Psyekoff. The young man had changed greatly during the
last few days. He had grown thin and pale, and looked haggard. His eyes
had an apathetic expression.

"Sit down, Psyekoff," said Chubikoff. "I hope that to-day you are going
to be reasonable, and will not tell lies, as you did before. All these
days you have denied that you had anything to do with the murder of
Klausoff, in spite of all the proofs that testify against you. That is
foolish. Confession will lighten your guilt. This is the last time I am
going to talk to you. If you do not confess to-day, to-morrow it will be
too late. Come, tell me all--"

"I know nothing about it. I know nothing about your proofs," answered
Psyekoff, almost inaudibly.

"It's no use! Well, let me relate to you how the matter took place. On
Saturday evening you were sitting in Klausoff's sleeping room, and
drinking vodka and beer with him." (Dukovski fixed his eyes on
Psyekoff's face, and kept them there all through the examination.)
"Nicholas was waiting on you. At one o'clock, Marcus Ivanovitch
announced his intention of going to bed. He always went to bed at one
o'clock. When he was taking off his boots, and was giving you directions
about details of management, you and Nicholas, at a given signal,
seized your drunken master and threw him on the bed. One of you sat on
his legs, the other on his head. Then a third person came in from the
passage--a woman in a black dress, whom you know well, and who had
previously arranged with you as to her share in your criminal deed. She
seized a pillow and began to smother him. While the struggle was going
on the candle went out. The woman took a box of safety matches from her
pocket, and lit the candle. Was it not so? I see by your face that I am
speaking the truth. But to go on. After you had smothered him, and saw
that he had ceased breathing, you and Nicholas pulled him out through
the window and laid him down near the burdock. Fearing that he might
come round again, you struck him with something sharp. Then you carried
him away, and laid him down under a lilac bush for a short time. After
resting awhile and considering, you carried him across the fence. Then
you entered the road. After that comes the dam. Near the dam, a peasant
frightened you. Well, what is the matter with you?"

"I am suffocating!" replied Psyekoff. "Very well--have it so. Only let
me go out, please!"

They led Psyekoff away.

"At last! He has confessed!" cried Chubikoff, stretching himself
luxuriously. "He has betrayed himself! And didn't I get round him
cleverly! Regularly caught him napping--"

"And he doesn't deny the woman in the black dress!" exulted Dukovski.
"But all the same, that safety match is tormenting me frightfully. I
can't stand it any longer. Good-bye! I am off!"

Dukovski put on his cap and drove off. Chubikoff began to examine
Aquilina. Aquilina declared that she knew nothing whatever about it.

At six that evening Dukovski returned. He was more agitated than he had
ever been before. His hands trembled so that he could not even unbutton
his greatcoat. His cheeks glowed. It was clear that he did not come
empty-handed.

"_Veni, vidi, vici!_" he cried, rushing into Chubikoff's room, and
falling into an armchair. "I swear to you on my honour, I begin to
believe that I am a genius! Listen, devil take us all! It is funny, and
it is sad. We have caught three already--isn't that so? Well, I have
found the fourth, and a woman at that. You will never believe who it is!
But listen. I went to Klausoff's village, and began to make a spiral
round it. I visited all the little shops, public houses, dram shops on
the road, everywhere asking for safety matches. Everywhere they said
they hadn't any. I made a wide round. Twenty times I lost faith, and
twenty times I got it back again. I knocked about the whole day, and
only an hour ago I got on the track. Three versts from here. They gave
me a packet of ten boxes. One box was missing. Immediately: 'Who bought
the other box?' 'Such-a-one! She was pleased with them!' Old man!
Nicholas Yermolaiyevitch! See what a fellow who was expelled from the
seminary and who has read Gaboriau can do! From to-day on I begin to
respect myself! Oof! Well, come!"

"Come where?"

"To her, to number four! We must hurry, otherwise--otherwise I'll burst
with impatience! Do you know who she is? You'll never guess! Olga
Petrovna, Marcus Ivanovitch's wife--his own wife--that's who it is! She
is the person who bought the matchbox!"

"You--you--you are out of your mind!"

"It's quite simple! To begin with, she smokes. Secondly, she was head
and ears in love with Klausoff, even after he refused to live in the
same house with her, because she was always scolding his head off. Why,
they say she used to beat him because she loved him so much. And then he
positively refused to stay in the same house. Love turned sour. 'Hell
hath no fury like a woman scorned.' But come along! Quick, or it will be
dark. Come!"

"I am not yet sufficiently crazy to go and disturb a respectable
honourable woman in the middle of the night for a crazy boy!"

"Respectable, honourable! Do honourable women murder their husbands?
After that you are a rag, and not an examining magistrate! I never
ventured to call you names before, but now you compel me to. Rag!
Dressing-gown!--Dear Nicholas Yermolaiyevitch, do come, I beg of
you--!"

The magistrate made a deprecating motion with his hand.

"I beg of you! I ask, not for myself, but in the interests of justice. I
beg you! I implore you! Do what I ask you to, just this once!"

Dukovski went down on his knees.

"Nicholas Yermolaiyevitch! Be kind! Call me a blackguard, a
ne'er-do-weel, if I am mistaken about this woman. You see what an affair
it is. What a case it is. A romance! A woman murdering her own husband
for love! The fame of it will go all over Russia. They will make you
investigator in all important cases. Understand, O foolish old man!"

The magistrate frowned, and undecidedly stretched his hand toward his
cap.

"Oh, the devil take you!" he said. "Let us go!"

It was dark when the magistrate's carriage rolled up to the porch of the
old country house in which Olga Petrovna had taken refuge with her
brother.

"What pigs we are," said Chubikoff, taking hold of the bell, "to disturb
a poor woman like this!"

"It's all right! It's all right! Don't get frightened! We can say that
we have broken a spring."

Chubikoff and Dukovski were met at the threshold by a tall buxom woman
of three and twenty, with pitch-black brows and juicy red lips. It was
Olga Petrovna herself, apparently not the least distressed by the recent
tragedy.

"Oh, what a pleasant surprise!" she said, smiling broadly. "You are just
in time for supper. Kuzma Petrovitch is not at home. He is visiting the
priest, and has stayed late. But we'll get on without him! Be seated.
You have come from the examination?"

"Yes. We broke a spring, you know," began Chubikoff, entering the
sitting room and sinking into an armchair.

"Take her unawares--at once!" whispered Dukovski; "take her unawares!"

"A spring--hum--yes--so we came in."

"Take her unawares, I tell you! She will guess what the matter is if you
drag things out like that."

"Well, do it yourself as you want. But let me get out of it," muttered
Chubikoff, rising and going to the window.

"Yes, a spring," began Dukovski, going close to Olga Petrovna and
wrinkling his long nose. "We did not drive over here--to take supper
with you or--to see Kuzma Petrovitch. We came here to ask you, respected
madam, where Marcus Ivanovitch is, whom you murdered!"

"What? Marcus Ivanovitch murdered?" stammered Olga Petrovna, and her
broad face suddenly and instantaneously flushed bright scarlet. "I
don't--understand!"

"I ask you in the name of the law! Where is Klausoff? We know all!"

"Who told you?" Olga Petrovna asked in a low voice, unable to endure
Dukovski's glance.

"Be so good as to show us where he is!"

"But how did you find out? Who told you?"

"We know all! I demand it in the name of the law!"

The examining magistrate, emboldened by her confusion, came forward and
said:

"Show us, and we will go away. Otherwise, we--"

"What do you want with him?"

"Madam, what is the use of these questions? We ask you to show us! You
tremble, you are agitated. Yes, he has been murdered, and, if you must
have it, murdered by you! Your accomplices have betrayed you!"

Olga Petrovna grew pale.

"Come!" she said in a low voice, wringing her hands.

"I have him--hid--in the bath house! Only for heaven's sake, do not tell
Kuzma Petrovitch. I beg and implore you! He will never forgive me!"

Olga Petrovna took down a big key from the wall, and led her guests
through the kitchen and passage to the courtyard. The courtyard was in
darkness. Fine rain was falling. Olga Petrovna walked in advance of
them. Chubikoff and Dukovski strode behind her through the long grass,
as the odour of wild hemp and dishwater splashing under their feet
reached them. The courtyard was wide. Soon the dishwater ceased, and
they felt freshly broken earth under their feet. In the darkness
appeared the shadowy outlines of trees, and among the trees a little
house with a crooked chimney.

"That is the bath house," said Olga Petrovna. "But I implore you, do not
tell my brother! If you do, I'll never hear the end of it!"

Going up to the bath house, Chubikoff and Dukovski saw a huge padlock on
the door.

"Get your candle and matches ready," whispered the examining magistrate
to his deputy.

Olga Petrovna unfastened the padlock, and let her guests into the bath
house. Dukovski struck a match and lit up the anteroom. In the middle of
the anteroom stood a table. On the table, beside a sturdy little
samovar, stood a soup tureen with cold cabbage soup and a plate with the
remnants of some sauce.

"Forward!"

They went into the next room, where the bath was. There was a table
there also. On the table was a dish with some ham, a bottle of vodka,
plates, knives, forks.

"But where is it--where is the murdered man?" asked the examining
magistrate.

"On the top tier," whispered Olga Petrovna, still pale and trembling.

Dukovski took the candle in his hand and climbed up to the top tier of
the sweating frame. There he saw a long human body lying motionless on a
large feather bed. A slight snore came from the body.

"You are making fun of us, devil take it!" cried Dukovski. "That is not
the murdered man! Some live fool is lying here. Here, whoever you are,
the devil take you!"

The body drew in a quick breath and stirred. Dukovski stuck his elbow
into it. It raised a hand, stretched itself, and lifted its head.

"Who is sneaking in here?" asked a hoarse, heavy bass. "What do you
want?"

Dukovski raised the candle to the face of the unknown, and cried out. In
the red nose, dishevelled, unkempt hair, the pitch-black moustache, one
of which was jauntily twisted and pointed insolently toward the ceiling,
he recognized the gallant cavalryman Klausoff.

"You--Marcus--Ivanovitch? Is it possible?"

The examining magistrate glanced sharply up at him, and stood
spellbound.

"Yes, it is I. That's you, Dukovski? What the devil do you want here?
And who's that other mug down there? Great snakes! It is the examining
magistrate! What fate has brought him here?"

Klausoff rushed down and threw his arms round Chubikoff in a cordial
embrace. Olga Petrovna slipped through the door.

"How did you come here? Let's have a drink, devil take it!
Tra-ta-ti-to-tum--let us drink! But who brought you here? How did you
find out that I was here? But it doesn't matter! Let's have a drink!"

Klausoff lit the lamp and poured out three glasses of vodka.

"That is--I don't understand you," said the examining magistrate,
running his hands over him. "Is this you or not you!"

"Oh, shut up! You want to preach me a sermon? Don't trouble yourself!
Young Dukovski, empty your glass! Friends, let us bring this--What are
you looking at? Drink!"

"All the same, I do not understand!" said the examining magistrate,
mechanically drinking off the vodka. "What are you here for?"

"Why shouldn't I be here, if I am all right here?"

Klausoff drained his glass and took a bite of ham.

"I am in captivity here, as you see. In solitude, in a cavern, like a
ghost or a bogey. Drink! She carried me off and locked me up, and--well,
I am living here, in the deserted bath house, like a hermit. I am fed.
Next week I think I'll try to get out. I'm tired of it here!"

"Incomprehensible!" said Dukovski.

"What is incomprehensible about it?"

"Incomprehensible! For Heaven's sake, how did your boot get into the
garden?"

"What boot?"

"We found one boot in the sleeping room and the other in the garden."

"And what do you want to know that for? It's none of your business! Why
don't you drink, devil take you? If you wakened me, then drink with me!
It is an interesting tale, brother, that of the boot! I didn't want to
go with Olga. I don't like to be bossed. She came under the window and
began to abuse me. She always was a termagant. You know what women are
like, all of them. I was a bit drunk, so I took a boot and heaved it at
her. Ha-ha-ha! Teach her not to scold another time! But it didn't! Not a
bit of it! She climbed in at the window, lit the lamp, and began to
hammer poor tipsy me. She thrashed me, dragged me over here, and locked
me in. She feeds me now--on love, vodka, and ham! But where are you off
to, Chubikoff? Where are you going?"

The examining magistrate swore, and left the bath house. Dukovski
followed him, crestfallen. They silently took their seats in the
carriage and drove off. The road never seemed to them so long and
disagreeable as it did that time. Both remained silent. Chubikoff
trembled with rage all the way. Dukovski hid his nose in the collar of
his overcoat, as if he was afraid that the darkness and the drizzling
rain might read the shame in his face.

When they reached home, the examining magistrate found Dr. Tyutyeff
awaiting him. The doctor was sitting at the table, and, sighing deeply,
was turning over the pages of the _Neva_.

"Such goings on there are in the world!" he said, meeting the examining
magistrate with a sad smile. "Austria is at it again! And Gladstone also
to some extent--"

Chubikoff threw his cap under the table, and shook himself.

"Devils' skeletons! Don't plague me! A thousand times I have told you
not to bother me with your politics! This is no question of politics!
And you," said Chubikoff, turning to Dukovski and shaking his fist, "I
won't forget this in a thousand years!"

"But the safety match? How could I know?"

"Choke yourself with your safety match! Get out of my way! Don't make me
mad, or the devil only knows what I'll do to you! Don't let me see a
trace of you!"

Dukovski sighed, took his hat, and went out.

"I'll go and get drunk," he decided, going through the door, and
gloomily wending his way to the public house.




VIII

SOME SCOTLAND YARD STORIES[F]

SIR ROBERT ANDERSON


When I took charge of the Criminal Investigation Department I was no
novice in matters relating to criminals and crime. In addition to
experience gained at the Bar and on the Prison Commission,
secret-service work had kept me in close touch with "Scotland Yard" for
twenty years, and during all that time I had the confidence, not only of
the chiefs, but of the principal officers of the detective force. I thus
entered on my duties with very exceptional advantages.

I was not a little surprised, therefore, to find occasion to suspect
that one of my principal subordinates was trying to impose on me as
though I were an ignoramus. For when any important crime of a certain
kind occurred, and I set myself to investigate it _a la_ Sherlock
Holmes, he used to listen to me in the way that so many people listen to
sermons in church; and when I was done he would stolidly announce that
the crime was the work of A, B, C, or D, naming some of his stock
heroes. Though a keen and shrewd police officer, the man was
unimaginative, and I thus accounted for the fact that his list was
always brief, and that the same names came up repeatedly. It was "Old
Carr," or "Wirth," or "Sausage," or "Shrimps," or "Quiet Joe," or "Red
Bob," etc., etc., one name or another being put forward according to the
kind of crime I was investigating.

It was easy to test my prosaic subordinate's statements by methods with
which I was familiar in secret-service work; and I soon found that he
was generally right. Great crimes are the work of great criminals, and
great criminals are very few. And by "great crimes" I mean, not crimes
that loom large in the public view because of their moral heinousness,
but crimes that are the work of skilled and resourceful criminals. The
problem in such cases is not to find the offender in a population of
many millions, but to pick him out from among a few definitely known
"specialists" in the particular sort of crime under investigation.

A volume might be filled with cases to illustrate my meaning; but a very
few must here suffice. It fell upon a day, for example, that a "ladder
larceny" was committed at a country house in Cheshire. It was the usual
story. While the family were at dinner, the house was entered by means
of a ladder placed against a bedroom window, all outer doors and
ground-floor windows having been fastened from outside by screws or wire
or rope; and wires were stretched across the lawn to baffle pursuit in
case the thieves were discovered. The next day the Chief Constable of
the county called on me; for, as he said, such a crime was beyond the
capacity of provincial practitioners, and he expected us to find the
delinquents among our pets at Scotland Yard. He gave me a vague
description of two strangers who had been seen near the house the day
before, and in return I gave him three photographs. Two of these were
promptly identified as the men who had come under observation. Arrest
and conviction followed, and the criminals received "a punishment suited
to their sin." One of them was "Quiet Joe"; the other, his special
"pal."

Their sentences expired about the time of my retirement from office, and
thus my official acquaintance with them came to an end. But in the
newspaper reports of a similar case the year after I left office, I
recognized my old friends. Rascals of this type are worth watching, and
the police had noticed that they were meeting at the Lambeth Free
Library, where their special study was provincial directories and books
of reference. They were tracked to a bookshop where they bought a map of
Bristol, and to other shops where they procured the plant for a "ladder
larceny." They then booked for Bristol and there took observations of
the suburban house they had fixed upon. At this stage the local
detectives, to whom of course the metropolitan officers were bound to
give the case, declared themselves and seized the criminals; and the
case was disposed of by a nine months' sentence on a minor issue.

Most people can be wise after the event, but even that sort of belated
wisdom seems lacking to the legislature and the law. If on the occasion
of their previous conviction, these men had been asked what they would
do on the termination of their sentence, they would have answered, "Why,
go back to business, of course; what else?" And at Bristol they would
have replied with equal frankness. On that occasion they openly
expressed their gratification that the officers did not wait to "catch
them fair on the job, as another long stretch would about finish
them"--a playful allusion to the fact that, as they were both in their
seventh decade, another penal servitude sentence would have seen the end
of them; whereas their return to the practice of their calling was only
deferred for a few months. Meanwhile they would live without expense,
and a paternal government would take care that the money found in their
pockets on their arrest would be restored to them on their release, to
enable them to buy more jimmies and wire and screws, so that no time
would be lost in getting to work. Such is our "punishment-of-crime"
system!

"Quiet Joe" made a good income by the practice of his profession; but he
was a thriftless fellow who spent his earnings freely, and never paid
income tax. "Old Carr" was of a different type. The man never did an
honest day's work in his life. He was a thief, a financier and trainer
of thieves, and a notorious receiver of stolen property. But though his
wealth was ill-gotten, he knew how to hoard it. Upon his last conviction
I was appointed statutory "administrator" of his estate. I soon
discovered that he owned a good deal of valuable house property. But
this I declined to deal with, and took charge only of his portable
securities for money. The value of this part of his estate may be
estimated by the fact that on his discharge he brought an action against
me for mal-administration of it, claiming ?5000 damages, and submitting
detailed accounts in support of his claim. Mr. Augustine Birrell was my
leading counsel in the suit; and I may add that though the old rascal
carried his case to the Court of Appeal he did not get his ?5000.

The man lived in crime and by crime; and old though he was (he was born
in 1828), and "rolling in wealth," he at once "resumed the practice of
his profession." He was arrested abroad this year during a trip taken to
dispose of some stolen notes, the proceeds of a Liverpool crime, and his
evil life came to an end in a foreign prison.

When I refused to deal with Carr's house property I allowed him to
nominate a friend to take charge of it, and he nominated a brother
professional, a man of the same kidney as himself, known in police
circles as "Sausage." A couple of years later, however, I learned from
the tenants that the agent had disappeared, and that their cheques for
rent had been returned to them. I knew what that meant, and at once
instituted inquiries to find the man, first in the metropolis and then
throughout the provinces; but my inquiries were fruitless. I learned,
however, that, when last at Scotland Yard, the man had said with
emphasis that "he would never again do anything at home." This was in
answer to a warning and an appeal; a warning that he would get no mercy
if again brought to justice, and an appeal to change his ways, as he had
made his pile and could afford to live in luxurious idleness. With this
clue to guide me, I soon learned that the man's insatiable zest for
crime had led him to cross the Channel in hope of finding a safer sphere
of work, and that he was serving a sentence in a French prison.

No words, surely, can be needed to point the moral of cases such as
these. The criminals who keep society in a state of siege are as strong
as they are clever. If the risk of a few years' penal servitude on
conviction gave place to the certainty of final loss of liberty, these
professionals would put up with the tedium of an honest life. Lombroso
theories have no application to such men. Benson, of the famous "Benson
and Kerr frauds," was the son of an English clergyman. He was a man of
real ability, of rare charms of manner and address, and an accomplished
linguist. Upon the occasion of one of Madame Patti's visits to America
he ingratiated himself with the customs officers at New York, and thus
got on board the liner before the arrival of the "Reception Committee."
He was of course a stranger to the great singer, but she was naturally
charmed by his appearance and bearing, and the perfection of his
Italian, and she had no reason to doubt that he had been commissioned
for the part he played so acceptably. And when the Reception Committee
arrived they assumed that he was a friend of Madame Patti's. Upon his
arm it was, therefore, that she leaned when disembarking. All this was
done with a view to carry out a huge fraud, the detection of which
eventually brought him to ruin. The man was capable of filling any
position; but the life of adventure and ease which a criminal career
provided had a fascination for him.

Facts like these failed to convince Dr. Max Nordau when he called upon
me years ago. At his last visit I put his "type" theory to a test. I had
two photographs so covered that nothing showed but the face, and telling
him that the one was an eminent public man and the other a notorious
criminal, I challenged him to say which was the "type." He shirked my
challenge. For as a matter of fact the criminal's face looked more
benevolent than the other, and it was certainly as "strong." The one was
Raymond _alias_ Wirth--the most eminent of the criminal fraternity of my
time--and the other was Archbishop Temple. Need I add that my story is
intended to discredit--not His Grace of Canterbury, but--the Lombroso
"type" theory.

Raymond, like Benson, had a respectable parentage. In early manhood he
was sentenced to a long term of imprisonment for a big crime committed
in New York. But he escaped and came to England. His schemes were
Napoleonic. His most famous _coup_ was a great diamond robbery. His
cupidity was excited by the accounts of the Kimberley mines. He sailed
for South Africa, visited the mines, accompanied a convoy of diamonds to
the coast, and investigated the whole problem on the spot. Dick Turpin
would have recruited a body of bushrangers and seized one of the
convoys. But the methods of the sportsmanlike criminal of our day are
very different. The arrival of the diamonds at the coast was timed to
catch the mail steamer for England; and if a convoy were accidentally
delayed _en route_, the treasure had to lie in the post office till the
next mail left. Raymond's plan of campaign was soon settled. He was a
man who could make his way in any company, and he had no difficulty in
obtaining wax impressions of the postmaster's keys. The postmaster,
indeed, was one of a group of admiring friends whom he entertained at
dinner the evening before he sailed for England.

Some months later he returned to South Africa under a clever disguise
and an assumed name, and made his way up country to a place at which the
diamond convoys had to cross a river ferry on their way to the coast.
Unshipping the chain of the ferry, he let the boat drift down stream,
and the next convoy missed the mail steamer. ?90,000 worth of diamonds
had to be deposited in the strong room of the post office; and those
diamonds ultimately reached England in Raymond's possession. He
afterward boasted that he sold them to their lawful owners in Hatton
Garden.

If I had ever possessed ?90,000 worth of anything, the government would
have had to find someone else to look after Fenians and burglars. But
Raymond loved his work for its own sake; and though he lived in luxury
and style, he kept to it to the last, organizing and financing many an
important crime.

A friend of mine who has a large medical practice in one of the London
suburbs told me once of an extraordinary patient of his. The man was a
_Dives_ and lived sumptuously, but he was extremely hypochondriacal.
Every now and then an urgent summons would bring the doctor to the
house, to find the patient in bed, though with nothing whatever the
matter with him. But the man always insisted on having a prescription,
which was promptly sent to the chemist. My friend's last summons had
been exceptionally urgent; and on his entering the room with unusual
abruptness, the man sprang up in bed and covered him with a revolver! I
might have relieved his curiosity by explaining that this eccentric
patient was a prince among criminals. Raymond knew that his movements
were matter of interest to the police; and if he had reason to fear
that he had been seen in dangerous company, he bolted home and "shammed
sick." And the doctor's evidence, confirmed by the chemist's books,
would prove that he was ill in bed till after the hour at which the
police supposed they had seen him miles away.

Raymond it was who stole the famous Gainsborough picture for which Mr.
Agnew had recently paid the record price of ?10,000. I may here say that
the owner acted very well in this matter. Though the picture was offered
him more than once on tempting terms he refused to treat for it, save
with the sanction of the police. And it was not until I intimated to him
that he might deal with the thieves that he took steps for its recovery.

The story of another crime will explain my action in this case. The
Channel gang of thieves mentioned on a previous page sometimes went for
larger game than purses and pocket-books. They occasionally robbed the
treasure chest of the mail steamer when a parcel of valuable securities
was passing from London to Paris. Tidings reached me that they were
planning a _coup_ of this kind upon a certain night, and I ascertained
by inquiry that a city insurance company meant to send a large
consignment of bonds to Paris on the night in question. How the thieves
got the information is a mystery; their organization must have been
admirable. But Scotland Yard was a match for them. I sent officers to
Dover and Calais to deal with the case, and the men were arrested on
landing at Calais. But they were taken empty-handed. A capricious order
of the railway company's marine superintendent at Dover had changed the
steamer that night an hour before the time of sailing; and while upon
the thieves was found a key for the treasure chest of the advertised
boat, they had none for the boat in which they had actually crossed.
But, _mirabile dictu_, during the passage they had managed to get a wax
impression of it! We also got hold of a cloak-room ticket for a
portmanteau which was found to contain some ?2000 worth of coupons
stolen by the gang on a former trip. The men included in the "bag" were
"Shrimps," "Red Bob," and an old sinner named Powell. But the criminal
law is skilfully framed in the interest of criminals, and it was
impossible to make a case against them. I succeeded, however, by dint of
urgent appeals to the French authorities, in having them kept in gaol
for three months.

And now for the point of my story. Powell had left a blank cheque with
his "wife," to be used in case he came to grief; and on his return to
England he found she had been false to him. She had drawn out all his
money, and gone off with another man; and the poor old rascal died of
want in the streets of Southampton.[G] He it was who was Raymond's
accomplice in stealing Mr. Agnew's picture, and with his death all hope
of a prosecution came to an end.

If my purpose here were to amuse, I might fill many a page with
narratives of this kind. But my object is to expose the error and folly
of our present system of dealing with crime. When a criminal court
claims to anticipate the judgment of the Great Assize in the case of a
hooligan convicted of some vulgar act of violence, the silliness and
profanity of the claim may pass unnoticed. But when the
"punishment-of-crime" system is applied to criminals of the type here
described, the imbecility of it must be apparent to all. With such men
crime is "the business of their lives." They delight in it. Their zest
for it never flags, even in old age. What leads men like Raymond or Carr
to risk a sentence of penal servitude is not a sense of want--that is a
forgotten memory. Nor is it even a craving for filthy lucre. The
controlling impulse is _a love of sport_, for every great criminal is a
thorough sportsman. And in the case of a man who is free from the
weakness of having a conscience, it is not easy to estimate the
fascination of a life of crime. Fancy the long-sustained excitement of
planning and executing crimes like Raymond's. In comparison with such
sport, hunting wild game is work for savages; salmon-fishing and
grouse-shooting, for lunatics and idiots!

The theft of the Gold Cup at Ascot illustrates what I am saying here.
The thieves arrived in motor cars; they were, we are told, "of
gentlemanly appearance, and immaculately dressed," and they paid their
way into the grand stand. The list of criminals of that type is a short
one; and no one need suppose that such men would risk penal servitude
for the paltry sum the cup would fetch. A crime involving far less risk
would bring them ten times as much booty. For no winner of the cup ever
derived more pleasure from the possession of it than the thieves must
have experienced as they drove to London with the treasure under the
seat of their motor car. For it was not the lust of filthy lucre, but
the love of sport that incited them to the venture. There are hundreds
of our undergraduates who would eagerly emulate the feat, were they not
deterred by its dangers. And a rule of three sum may explain my proposal
to put an end to such crimes. Let the consequences to the professional
criminal be made equal to what imprisonment would mean to a "Varsity"
man, and the thing is done.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote F: From "Criminals and Crime."]

[Footnote G: "Shrimps" also found that his "wife" had proved unfaithful.
He disappeared, and I heard that he had filled his pockets with stones
and thrown himself into the sea. Had the men been in an English gaol
they would have communicated with their friends; but in Boulogne prison
they were absolutely buried, and their women gave them up.]
