THE BUSHWHACKER'S GRATITUDE.

BY KIRKE MUNROE.


As we sat over our after-dinner coffee and cigars in the major's cosy
library, one evening last winter, I discovered my host to be in a
reminiscent mood, and ventured to ask him a question that I had
frequently meditated. He smiled and was silent for a moment before
answering.

"Yes, I have, as you suggest, experienced a number of what may be termed
adventures since entering Uncle Sam's service. Of them all, however, I
have no difficulty in recalling one that stands out pre-eminently as the
most thrilling experience of my life;" and then he gave this narrative:

"Shortly after the close of the war, I was ordered to a remote section
of the South, not far from the Gulf coast, to investigate certain claims
against the Government that involved what, for that part of the country,
was a large sum of money. As, for several reasons, it was deemed
advisable that my real business there should be kept secret, I assumed
the role of a settler, took possession of a vacant tract of land, built
a two-pen log cabin, engaged a negro servant, and proceeded to explore
the country with a view to making the acquaintance of my neighbors.

"The place in which I was located was remote from railroads or regular
routes of travel, and was about as wild and lawless a district as could
well be found east of the Mississippi. It was a limestone country,
abounding in sink-holes, caverns, and underground rivers, and thickly
covered with a primeval growth of timber. A few clearings at long
intervals marked the fields and garden patches of its widely scattered
inhabitants, who were as primitive a set of people as I had ever
encountered. During the war it had been a very hot-bed of bushwhacking,
and its men had plundered and killed on both sides, with a slight
predilection in favor of Southerners and a bitter hatred of Yankees.
Although I carefully concealed my connection with the army, and was most
guarded in my remarks whenever forced to allude to the war, I could not
hide the fact that I was a Northern man. On that account alone I was
from the first an object of suspicion and close scrutiny to my
neighbors, by most of whom my friendly overtures were received with a
sullen unresponsiveness that was, to say the least, discouraging.

"My nearest neighbor was a giant of a man named Case Haffner, who, as I
learned before leaving Washington, was the acknowledged leader of the
district and foremost in all its deeds of deviltry. He, better than any
other, could furnish me with the information I wished to acquire. For
this reason I had taken up my abode as near to him as the unwritten law
of the country, which forbade neighbors to live within less than a mile
of each other, allowed. In vain did I strive to cultivate his
acquaintance. He would have nothing to do with me. Only by stratagem did
I succeed in meeting him, when he simply ignored my presence and walked
away without a word. He lived alone with his son Abner, a bright,
keen-witted lad of about fifteen, the pride of his father's life and the
sole object of his ambitions. With this boy I also tried to scrape an
acquaintance, hoping to win the father's confidence through him, but to
no purpose. He either eluded me or fled like a startled deer if by
chance we met. While others of the neighborhood sought my house with a
view to satisfy their curiosity, with Case Haffner and his son 'Ab,' I
could hold no intercourse.

"So matters stood at the end of a month, when, late one evening, on
returning from an all day's ride to a remote corner of the settlement I
was overtaken by a terrific thunder storm while still some distance from
home. I was accompanied by C?sar, my negro servant, and we were on
horseback. Bewildered by the storm we lost our way, and after a half
hour of hopeless wandering, floundering and general discomfort I was
more than thankful to discover a feeble light twinkling in the window of
a log cabin.

"Receiving no response to my repeated knockings at the door, I pushed it
open and entered. I had not recognized the cabin and did not know until
I saw Case Haffner sitting on a stool before the great mud-chinked
fire-place, that it was his. The man's face was buried in his hands, and
he did not look up at my entrance, nor in any way betray a consciousness
of my presence. As I glanced about the rudely-furnished room in search
of Abner, my eye fell upon a bed on which lay the motionless form of the
boy. The light was dim, and fancying him to be asleep, I called him by
name.

"At this the man by the fire sprang to his feet, and glaring at me like
a wild beast, cried out with a terrible oath that his son was dead, and
for me to be gone before he killed me for intruding on his misery.
Instead of obeying him I stepped to the bedside. The boy was to all
appearance lifeless, but disregarding the father's protest, and making a
careful examination of the body, I became convinced that the vital spark
had not yet fled. He had been stricken with one of the quick fevers of
that country and had apparently succumbed to it. With a slight medical
knowledge gained in the army, I saw that there was still a chance of
saving him. C?sar was at once dispatched to fetch my traveling medicine
case, while I heated a kettle of water. Case Haffner meantime regarding
my movements with an apathetic indifference. To make a long story short,
I succeeded before morning in restoring the boy to life and a healthful
sleep. At the end of a week, during which I visited him daily, his
recovery was assured.

"In all this time, though the father watched my every movement with a
catlike intentness, he never spoke to me if he could help it nor did he
express the slightest gratitude for the service I had rendered him.
Thus, when the boy was so far recovered that I had no longer an excuse
for visiting the Haffners' cabin, I was apparently as far from gaining
their friendship or confidence as I had been before the night of the
storm.

"This state of affairs continued unchanged when at the end of three
months from my arrival in that place I found my business there nearly
concluded. I had established the validity of the claims I had been sent
to investigate, had reported upon them, and had been ordered to settle
them with the money that would be forwarded to me for that purpose. At
the same time I imagined that all this business had been conducted with
such secrecy as to be unsuspected by a human being beside myself and my
principals in the matter. Thus thinking, I went alone, and without a
feeling of insecurity, to the nearest railway station, where I expected
to receive the money. It did not arrive on that day; but instead I found
a cipher dispatch stating that it would be sent a week later. Accepting
the situation with as good grace as possible, I purchased some
provisions, placed them in the canvas bag that I had provided for the
money and returned to my temporary forest home.

"Late that night I was awakened from a sound sleep by a knock at the
door of my room. In answer to my inquiry of 'Who's there?' came a
request in the voice of my negro man, that I would give him some
medicine to relieve 'de colic misery dat was like to kill him.' As he
had made similar requests, with which I had complied, several times
before, I unsuspiciously opened the door.

"The candle that I had just lighted gave me a glimpse of C?sar, with
ashen face and the muzzle of a revolver pressed against his head. At the
same moment a pistol was leveled at my own face and I was seized and
bound by two masked men. In vain did I demand the meaning of this
outrage. No answer was given, and I was led outside, while a hasty but
thorough search was made of every portion of the cabin. It was, of
course, a fruitless one, and after a while the two men who made it
rejoined the one who was guarding me.

"Now one of them spoke, and in a voice which in spite of its disguised
tone I at once recognized as that of Case Haffner said, 'You mought as
well give us that money, Major, fer we're bound to have it, and the
quicker you surrender it the easier we'll let you off.'

"I answered that I had no money; that it had not arrived. They replied
that they knew all about my business, and that being closely watched I
had been seen to bring that money, which they knew I expected to
receive, home from the railway station the evening before.

"Finally their leader said: 'Well, Major, ef you are bound not to own up
till we force you to, we'll have to try a dose of the Black Hole, and I
reckon that'll fetch you to terms quicker'n most anything.'

"I had heard of the Black Hole, and the suggestion thrilled me with
horror. It was a pit in the lime rock reputed to be of fabulous depth
and was located at some distance from my cabin in one of the most
impenetrable of the forest recesses. From it, so the negroes had told
me, issued uncanny moanings and groans which they attributed to the
ghosts of those who they declared had been flung into it by the
bushwhackers when they wished to effectually remove all traces of some
of their numerous deeds of blood.

"I protested and made promises, but to no purpose. My money or the Black
Hole was the only answer I received, as I was hurried away through the
forest. No other word was spoken, and, left to my own bitter
reflections, I took no note of the direction in which we were going, nor
of the distance traversed. When we at length halted I became conscious
of a hollow moaning sound that seemed to come from the earth at my feet.

"Once more the question was asked, 'Will you give in, Major, and tell us
where the money is, or shall we drop you into the back door of hell?'

"I answered, 'For God's sake, gentlemen, believe me when I say that I
have received no money. If I had I would gladly give it as the price of
my life.'

"A mocking laugh was their only reply. In another moment a slender rope
was knotted under my pinioned arms and a sudden push left me swinging
helplessly in the mouth of the awful pit beside which we had halted.

"'We'll wait here just one hour, Major,' came to me in Case Haffner's
voice, 'and give you a chance to consider the situation. If you decide
to let us have the money inside of that time, jest holler, and we'll
pull you up. If you decide to go to hell and take the greenbacks with
you, why, we'll jest have ter bid you good-by, that's all.'

"Then I was slowly lowered down, down, down, through the blackness. So
slow was my descent that I seemed to be suspended for hours and to sink
miles into the heart of the earth. The pain of the slender cord cutting
into my flesh was well-nigh intolerable, and I bear livid evidences of
it to this day; with each moment the moaning, gurgling, and groaning
from the unknown depths into which I was sinking became more distinct
and horrible.

"Suddenly, those above let go of the rope and with a yell of despair I
dropped, I do not know how far, into water that closed above my head. As
I rose to the surface, choking and gasping for breath, I felt that I was
being swept forward by a powerful current, and as I again sank my feet
touched bottom. A moment later I stood in water up to my shoulders and
again breathed freely. For some time I was confused beyond the power of
thought by the hollow roar of the black waters rushing through those
awful caverns. All surrounding space seemed filled with snarling,
formless monsters, cautiously advancing and making ready to spring at
me. Even now I often awake at night with the horror of that moment
strong upon me. It was so unendurable that I resolved to end it. It was
with great difficulty that I maintained my footing. I could not do so
much longer. Why should I attempt to? There was absolutely no hope of
escape. I tried to pray 'Oh, Lord Jesus, receive my soul.' Then my
muscles relaxed and I was swept away by the rushing torrent.

"I have no idea how far I was carried before my feet again touched
bottom, this time in water that was not above my waist. I had closed my
eyes. Now I opened them. A bright light was swinging to and fro not a
hundred feet from me. I stared at it blankly and with little interest,
only wondering with a languid curiosity what sort of a subterranean
_ignis fatuus_ it might be, when suddenly my bewildered senses were
startled into renewed activity by the sound of a shout. It was a human
voice uttering a long-drawn 'Hello-o-o!' that echoed and reechoed
weirdly through the cavernous depths about me. I essayed to answer, but
could not. Then I slowly made my way through the shoaling water toward
the light.

"In another minute I stood beside a boy, the one whose life I had saved
two months before, and as he cut the thongs that bound my arms he said
cheerily:

"'It's all right, Major. Paw'lowed you'd be coming along this yere way
'bout this time o' night, en' telled me to shorely be on hand to meet up
with yer. Now, ef yo'll foller me, we'll be outen this direckly.'

"The boy was standing in the mouth of a narrow passage, that, free from
water, led away almost at right angles to the main channel of the
underground river. It ended at a well-like opening in which stood a rude
ladder, climbing this, we emerged through a well concealed trap door
into the very room where Abner Haffner had laid at the point of death
two months before."

"Is that all?" I asked, as the major paused and lighted a fresh cigar.

"Yes, it's all of that story. I could not cause the arrest of the gang,
even had I known who composed it, without causing that of their leader,
and from the moment that blessed light illumined the black waters of
that underground river I would not have harmed Case Haffner for anything
the world holds best worth having. No; by daylight I was well out of
that section of country, nor have I ever since set foot in it."

"Have you ever heard again from that boy?"

"Who, Abner? Well, I should say I had. I put him through college, and he
is in Congress to-day. If I should tell you his real name you would
instantly recognize it as that of one of the smartest men ever sent to
Washington from the far South."
