THE END OF ALL.

BY NYM CRINKLE.


The difficulty that I experience in complying with your request, dear
spirit, springs from the terrestrial limitations of thought and
expression, from which, as you may well know, I have not been long
enough with you to free myself.

I shall, however, give you a plain narrative of the events attending the
extinction of life on our planet, asking you only to remember that I am
doing it just as I would have done it, were it possible, for a fellow
human being while on earth, using the phraseology and the terrestrial
time divisions with which I am most familiar.

The circumstance which at our last intercourse I was trying to explain
to you was simply this: In the early summer of the year 1892 a sudden
interruption of navigation occurred on the Pacific coast, which,
curiously enough, attracted very little attention outside of scientific
circles. I was living at the house of my wealthy friend, Judge Brisbane,
in Gramercy Park. To tell you the truth, I was in love with his
beautiful daughter, of whom I shall have to speak more fully to you, for
she was intimately associated with me in the appalling scenes which you
desire me to describe.

I was sitting in the Judge's library on the night of June 25. His
daughter was present, and I had been conversing with her in an undertone
while the Judge read the evening papers. He suddenly laid down the
paper, took off his spectacles, and, turning round in his chair, said to
me: "Did you see the brief dispatch in the morning papers two days ago
from San Francisco, saying that all the eastern-bound vessels were
overdue on that coast?"

I replied at once that I had not noticed it.

"It is astonishing," he said, "that in our present system of journalism
the most important events connected with the welfare of mankind receive
the slightest attention from the newspapers, and the trivialities of
life are most voluminously treated. A movement in the iron trade that
affects millions of homes gets a brief paragraph in small type, and the
quarrel of a ballet girl with her paramour receives illuminated
attention down whole columns. Here is something taking place in the
Pacific Ocean of surpassing interest to the race, and nobody pays the
slightest attention to it except, perhaps, the consignees and shipping
clerks."

"What is it?" we both asked, with the languid interest that young
people, having an overmastering personal affair on hand, would be apt to
take in matters of national or universal importance.

The Judge got up, and going to a side table, where he kept his papers
piled in chronological order, pulled out a recent issue of a morning
journal, and after looking it over searchingly a moment, said:

"Here. I should think you would notice such a paragraph as this." Then
he read, as I recollect, a telegraphic dispatch to this effect:

     "SAN FRANCISCO, June 23.--Considerable anxiety is felt here in
     commercial circles by the non-arrival of any eastward-bound vessels
     for a week. The steamship _Cathay_ of the Occidental Line is
     overdue four days. An unusual easterly wind has been blowing for
     twenty-four hours. Weather mild.

"That dispatch, you will perceive," said the Judge, "was sent two days
ago. Now here, on the 25th, I read in the evening paper another dispatch
from San Francisco, hidden away at the bottom of a column of commercial
news. Listen to this:

     "SAN FRANCISCO, June 25.--The entire suspension of travel from the
     West continues to excite the gravest apprehensions. Nothing but
     coastwise vessels have come in during the past eight days. The U.
     S. cruiser _Mobile_ left Honolulu three weeks ago for this coast.
     There is no official intimation of a storm in the Chinese seas."

The Judge laid the paper down, and regarded us both a moment in silence,
as if expecting to hear some remark that indicated our suddenly awakened
curiosity.

I don't think we responded with any adequate interest to the occasion.
Miss Brisbane did, indeed, stare at her father in her dreamy, abstracted
way a moment, and then got up, and, going to the open window, began to
arrange the curtains, as if relinquishing whatever problem there was to
the superior acumen of the masculine mind.

I think I said that it looked as if there had been a cyclone somewhere,
and if there had we should in all probability get the accounts of it
soon enough.

"But, young man," replied the Judge, with his majesterial emphasis,
"cyclones do not extend from the fiftieth degree of north latitude to
the fortieth degree of south latitude, and vessels are due at San
Francisco from Melbourne and Japan."

"What, then, other than a storm at sea could have caused a detention of
all these vessels?" I asked, and I must have unwittingly betrayed in the
tone of my voice, or the expression of my face, that considerate
superciliousness with which youth regards the serious notions of mature
philosophers, for the Judge, putting his gold spectacles upon his nose,
and regarding me over the top of them a moment, said rather severely:

"Other than the known and regular phenomena of this planet do not
interest young men. If I could answer your question there would be no
special interest in the matter."

I mention these trivial incidents because, insignificant as they may
seem, they were the first ripples of that disaster which was soon enough
to overwhelm us all, and to show you what were the only premonitions the
world had of the events which were to follow.

On June 26, the subject did not occur to me. A hundred other things of
far more immediate consequence to me occupied my attention. A young man
who is preparing to get married is not apt to take somber views of
anything. Nor is he very apt to allow the contumacy of age in his
prospective father-in-law to aggravate him. It was a pardonable freak, I
thought, in a man who had retired in most respects from the active
world, to dogmatize a little about that world now that he judged it
through his favorite evening paper. When, therefore, on the night of the
26th, while at the tea-table, the Judge broke out again about the
meteorological wave on the Pacific coast, his daughter Kate and I
exchanged a rapid but furtive glance which said, in the perfect
understanding of lovers, "There comes the old gentleman's new hobby
again, and we can well afford to treat it leniently."

The Judge had the damp evening paper in his hand, and he disregarded the
steaming cup of tea which his daughter had poured for him.

"Well," he said, with a toss of self-satisfied import. "Now the
newspapers are waking up to the significance of the California news." He
then read from the paper, as nearly as I can recollect, something like
the following:

     SAN FRANCISCO, June 26.--There is an intense and growing anxiety on
     this coast with respect to the non-appearance of any eastward-bound
     vessels. The breeze from the east continues, and is unprecedented.

"Now, I should like to know," said the Judge, as he laid down the paper
and took up his tea-cup, "why a breeze from the east in California
should be unprecedented."

"Because," I ventured to remark, "it usually blows from the sea at this
season."

"Nonsense," exclaimed the Judge with vigor. "A variation for a few days
in wind or weather is a common occurrence everywhere. Fancy a message
sent all over the world from the West Indies that the trade winds were
six days late, or a telegram from Minnesota that the winter frosts had
been interfered with for a week by pleasant sunshine. No, sir. The event
of importance to the Californian at this moment is the mysterious
something that has happened out at sea, and there is no excuse for his
associating a summer breeze from the east with it, except that there is
something peculiar about that breeze that associates it in the mind with
the predominant mystery."

I smiled. "You will pardon me, Judge, but it seems to me," I said, "that
you are trying to invest the whole affair with an occult significance
that is subjective. I suppose that in a few hours the matter will be
explained and forgotten."

In a moment we were in one of those foolish little wrangles in which, so
far as argument is concerned, the younger man is at a great
disadvantage, when the elder, however unreasonable his claims, enforces
them with the advantage of age and position. I remember that the desire
to convince Kate on the one hand that I was free from what I conceived
to be her father's unreasonableness, and sustain my independence of
views on the other hand, led me to say much more than was polite, for I
exasperated the old gentleman, and with a curt and not altogether
complimentary remark he got up and left the room.

The moment he was gone I turned to the daughter and laughingly said:
"Well, my dear, I am afraid I have offended your father without
intending it, but you at least understand me, and are free from his
superstition."

To my surprise she regarded me with a serious air, and replied: "I do
not know what you mean by superstition. My father believes that
something has happened, and I feel that he is right."

"You do not mean to tell me," I said, "that you believe anything has
happened that can concern us?"

She made no reply. I looked at her with some astonishment, and wondered
if I had offended her by opposing her father's childish views.

"Perhaps," I persisted, "you, too, think I am stupidly unreasonable
because I will not consent to be dishonestly chimerical."

I well remember the look of sad reproach with which she silently
regarded me, and I well remember, too, the thought that came into my
mind. I said to myself: "This is the same obduracy that her father has
shown. Odd it is that I never noticed the trait in her before." Then I
added, with an equal obduracy that I was not conscious of:

"Perhaps you, too, have discovered some peculiarity of good sense in me
that is offensive, and you are afraid that something will happen if
we----"

Here she interrupted me in her quiet, resolute, and reproachful way.

"Something has happened," she said.

I was amazed. If I had suddenly discovered that the woman I loved was
unfaithful to me it could not have produced, in my frame of mind at that
moment, a greater shock. It seemed to me then that the wooing of months,
the confidence and affection of a year, were to be sacrificed in a
moment of infatuated stubbornness. The very thought was so unnatural
that it produced a revulsion in my own feelings.

"My darling," I said, as I went toward her impulsively, "we are playing
the unworthy part of fools. Nothing can ever happen that will make us
love each other less, or prevent you from being my wife."

I put my arm around her in the old familiar way. She was passive and
irresponsive. She stood there, limply holding the curtain, with one
white arm upraised, her beautiful head bent over and her eyes cast down
so that I could not look into her face. This stony obduracy was so new
and unlike her that I withdrew my arm and stepped back a little to
regard her with astonishment, not unmingled with pique. At that moment
she lifted her head slowly, and as she looked at me with a dreamy and
far-away pathos I saw that her eyes were filled with tears.

"It seems to me," she said, with a voice that sounded as if it was
addressed to an invisible phantom way beyond me. "It seems to me that I
shall never be your wife!"

I must have stared at her several seconds in silence. Then I said:

"You are ill. You are not yourself. When you have recovered your normal
condition I will come back."

I snatched a kiss from her lips, that were strangely cold, and rushed
from the house.

It was not till the next morning, when I woke up after a short and
disturbed sleep, that my mind reverted to the cause of all this purely
sentimental disagreement, and I felt a strong desire to have events
prove that the Judge was slightly monomaniacal, and that I was right. I
went to Riccadonnas' for my breakfast and got all the morning papers, as
usual, but this time with a distinct confidence that the news would be
the best vindication of my good sense, and that I should yet have a good
laugh at the Judge.

I opened the paper as I sipped my coffee, and the first thing my eyes
fell on were the headlines of a dispatch from St. Louis. I read them
with an inexplicable sense of something sinking in me. As I recall them
they ran as follows:

"Strange news from the West. All communication west of Salt Lake City
ceases. Meteorological puzzle. What is the matter with the wires?"

Then followed the dispatch, which I have not forgotten:

     ST. LOUIS, June 26, 8 P. M.--A dispatch received here from Yuma on
     the Texas Pacific announces that no eastern-bound train has come in
     since morning, and all attempts to open communication by telegraph
     with points west of that place have failed. It is the opinion of
     railroad men that a great storm is raging in California. Weather
     here pleasant, with a steady, dry wind from the east blowing.

Immediately following this was another news item which I can quote from
memory:

     DENVER, June 26, 9 P. M.--Intelligence from Cheyenne is to the
     effect that railway travel and telegraphic communication west of
     Pocatello on the Union Pacific and Ogden and on the Central Pacific
     have been interrupted by a storm. The telegraph wires are believed
     to be in good condition, but up to nine o'clock there has been no
     return current.

I read these paragraphs over three or four times. Ordinarily I should
have passed them by and given my attention to other and more congenial
news. But now a dull fear that events were conspiring to widen the
breach between myself and the Brisbanes focussed my interest on them.
There was that easterly wind blowing again; was I, too, growing
superstitious? I turned over all the papers. The news was the same in
all, but there was not an editorial paragraph of comment in any of the
sheets, which, indeed, teamed with all the details of active commercial,
political, and social life.

I went down town after eating my breakfast and found that the
intelligence had not awakened any public attention that was observable.
The two or three persons to whom I spoke with regard to it treated it as
one of the passing sensations of the hour that would be explained sooner
or later. It was not till the evening papers of the 27th came out that
the matter began to be discussed. The dispatches in these papers were of
a nature to arouse widespread anxiety. It was very obvious from their
construction and import that the feeling west of the Mississippi was
more intense than had up to this time been suspected. The columns of the
papers were filled with brief but rather startling telegrams from
various points. Denver, El Paso, Salt Lake City, Cheyenne, St. Paul, St.
Louis, and Chicago sent anxious sentences which had a thrill of
trepidation in their broken phrases. And it was easy to see that this
feeling of deep concern increased with each dispatch from a point
further west.

Telegrams sent to St. Louis, Chicago, and St. Paul represented the
condition of anxiety in Ogden and Pocatello to be bordering on
excitement. Fears were entertained, the dispatches said, of a
"meteorological cataclysm," and thousands who had friends either on the
coast or in transit were besieging the telegraph offices in vain.

The hurried comments of the evening papers on the news were singularly
unsatisfactory and non-committal. "The unprecedented storm that is now
raging on the Pacific slope," I read, "and which has temporarily cut off
communications with the far West, will by its magnitude fill the country
with the most serious apprehensions." "The earliest news from
California, which shall give us the details of the storm," said another
paper, "will be looked for with eagerness, and will be promptly and
fully furnished to our readers."

As curious as anybody could be to know what kind of a storm it was that
had stopped railroad travel from Idaho to Mexico, and remarking with
surprise that the Signal Office utterly refused to recognize a great
storm anywhere, I dismissed the subject from my mind with the reflection
that there would in all probability be explanatory news in the morning,
and resolved to make my usual visit to the Brisbane family.

To my surprise, Kate received me cordially, and with no other allusion
to the unpleasantness of the night before than a demure remark that she
was afraid she had offended me.

"Let us not refer to it at all," I said, "and thus avoid making idiots
of ourselves."

"I am glad you came to-night," she remarked, after a moment's silence,
"for I wanted to tell you of the change we are going to make."

A little pang darted through me. It was said so seriously.

"What is it, my dear," I asked, trying to be as affectionate as if the
conditions had not changed.

"My father and I have determined to go to Europe."

"To Europe!" I repeated, aghast. "You surely do not mean it?"

"Yes," resolutely. "He wanted to consult you about it, but was afraid
you would disagree with his plans."

"And when did he make up his mind to take this sudden move?"

"This morning."

"And you intend to go with him?"

"Yes, and I was going to ask you to go, too."

"When do you propose to go?"

"Immediately."

It was evident to my mind now that this old man was a panic-stricken
monomaniac, and had infected his daughter with his fears.

"Kate," I said, as I took her by her hands and pulled her to the sofa
beside me, "you are running away from something; it is not from me, is
it?"

"I want you to go with us," she answered.

"But you knew when you asked me that I could not go so suddenly. You
expected me to refuse."

"No," she said, "I expect you to consent."

"Be careful. In a moment of bravado I may take you at your word, at any
cost!"

She caught hold of me. "Do," she said, tremulously, and I felt a little
shiver in her hand. "Do, do."

"I would rather go with you than lose you," I said at a hazard, "and if
you are determined to go, I believe I will accompany you if your father
will consent."

"We are determined," she calmly replied.

"But I must put my affairs in order," I suggested.

"How many hours will it take you?"

"Hours?" I repeated. "You would not like to start to-night, surely?"

"Yes," she answered, "I would gladly start to-night."

My patience was giving way very fast at this imperturbable obduracy.
"Perhaps," I said, "you will give me some adequate reason for a haste
that I cannot comprehend."

She did not answer. She was listening, with her head averted, and she
held up her hand for me to listen also, as if that were her answer. Then
there came through the open window the hoarse cry of a distant newsboy
who was bellowing an "extra."

There was something weird in her attitude and action, connecting, as
they did, her motives with that discordant, ominous cry.

"It's an extra," I said, as unconcernedly as possible. "I'll get a copy.
There may be some good news for you," and I made a move toward the
window.

"Don't," she said, quietly. "We were talking about going to Europe. Pa
is not familiar with the business of securing passages, and you are. You
could relieve him of a great deal of worry, and if you would go with
us----"

"Kate," I said, "do you want me to go?"

"Yes, I do," she replied. "I do not want to leave you here."

"Then," I said, "I will go. I will see your father in the morning and
tell him that I will attend to the whole business of securing passages.
I will set about arranging my affairs at once."

She then let me plague her a little about her timidity, and after a half
hour of playful badinage on my part I came away, with a parting promise
on my lips to lose no delay in making the arrangements for our
departure.

Such, however, was not my intention. I felt sure that the Judge and his
daughter would change their minds if I could only manage to delay
matters a few days. To go running off to Europe at a moment's notice
would be utter folly for me.

As I left the house I heard the voices of the newsboys in various keys
still calling the extras. I bought a paper and read it under the
gaslight of the church on Twentieth Street. "Display" headlines
announced, "As Silent as the Grave; Nothing Heard from the Pacific.
Great Excitement in Chicago and St. Louis." I must have stood there ten
minutes poring over the strange news. An expedition in a special train
had been sent west from Yuma that day, with railroad men and doctors. It
had left at 3 P. M. The train reached Mesquite in less than an hour, and
word was sent back from that station, "All right here; track clear; will
reach the springs at 9 P. M." A dispatch from Yuma sent at 10 o'clock
and received at St. Louis said, "Nothing further heard from the
special." News from Chicago, where the excitement appeared to be
momentarily growing, reflected intelligence from Denver, St. Paul, and
Kansas City, and it was vain to ignore the fact that the entire West was
in an alarming condition of anxiety. A special train was fitting out at
Cheyenne under Government orders to start in the morning with a corps of
Signal Service men, army officers, and electricians. It was to go
provided with every scientific appliance, and to carry an insulated
cable to be paid out from the car. The accounts said that the people
were all on the streets in Cheyenne, and an enormous mob surrounded the
station where the preparations were making.

For the first time I felt, as I threw the paper away, what I can only
call a sense of misgiving. As I walked up the deserted avenue this
feeling grew upon me, and when I reached Twenty-third Street, on my way
to the Fifth Avenue Hotel, a sudden and entirely new reflection made me
stop unconsciously as I turned it over in my mind. "If this strange news
has affected Judge Brisbane and his daughter so seriously, why may it
not be affecting millions of other people similarly? If there is at this
moment a panic in the West, how long will it take the reflex wave to
reach New York?"

The next morning events, or at least the publication of them, had
reached that condition which arrests public attention everywhere. The
news from the West swamped all else in the morning journals. The
editors, by their work, now acknowledged that the mysterious silence on
the Pacific Slope was by far the most important subject for
consideration before the world. The moment I glanced at the sheets I saw
that there was but one theme in the journalistic mind.

Two days had passed, and the silence was unbroken. Never before in the
history of the world had the absence of news become such important news.
Public attention was now mainly centered on the attempt to get a train
of observation through from Cheyenne.

There was a hopeful spirit to most of the accounts, as if it was
believed that science would unravel the mystery. But there was nothing
from any quarter of the globe that as yet afforded the feeblest gleam of
comfort. The Government train was to start early on this, the morning of
the 28th, and the papers were only able to furnish details of the
preparation and reports of the public excitement in Cheyenne and Denver.
The officers on the train were to send dispatches from every station
west of Pocatello. They were sagacious, experienced men, and the
expedition was under the direction of the well-known engineer, General
Albert Carrall.

I felt as I read the accounts that these men would probably clear up the
mystery, and I resolved to delay engaging the passages on the ocean
steamer until the next day. So I wrote a carefully worded note to Judge
Brisbane, informing him that I would attend to the matter immediately.
Had I then had the slightest knowledge of the cumulative rapidity with
which a panic moves I would not have taken this risk. But my whole
object was to gain time, with the hope that something would occur to
change the minds of my two timid friends.

On the night of the 28th I avoided the Brisbane establishment, although
my desire drew me in that direction. I resolved to wait until the
morrow, and if nothing happened to change the determination of the Judge
to go to Europe, to then make my arrangements to go with him and Kate.
That night there was a visible change in the metropolis. The theaters
were deserted, men and women were congregated at the corners and were
walking in the roadways--a sure indication in a great city of some
popular disturbance. The bulletins and news centers were crowded, and
the mystery of the great silence was being discussed by everybody. One
thing struck everybody with a vague terror, and it was the accounts of
the strange wind that was now blowing at Cheyenne and Denver. One
special correspondent at Cheyenne said "that it seemed to him that the
atmosphere of the earth, influenced by some incomprehensible suction,
was all rushing to an unseen vortex. It was not in any sense a
disturbance of the atmosphere that we usually call a wind, but a steady,
silent draught. And the spectacle of trees bent over and held all day by
the pressure, but unfluttered and unrelieved by fluctuant variations,
filled them with wonder and dread."

I got up early on the morning of the 29th, for I had slept lightly and
fitfully. To my surprise I found that almost everybody else was up. It
made me realize, as I had not done before, the feverish tension of
public expectation. The news, if news it can be called, was startling.
Let me try and repeat it to you just as it was presented to my sense.
The special train, upon which the eyes of the whole country were fixed,
had been heard from. It had gone west from Cheyenne and passed through
Pocatello without interruption. Then followed the dispatches received
from it at Cheyenne as it passed the stations beyond Pocatello. They
were in this order and to this effect:

     MICHANO, 10 A. M.--All right. Instruments working well. Track
     clear. Inhabitants appear to be moving east. No intelligence of a
     definite character obtained. Shoshone 108 miles west. Expect to
     make it in four hours.

     BANNOCK, 2:30 P. M.--Conditions unchanged. Passed moving settlers
     all the way. They are going east with chattels. Wind from the east
     has the pressure without the violence of a gale. Party in good
     spirits.

     SUNSHINE, 3:15.--Vast herds of wild cattle now impeding progress.
     Wind increasing. Road otherwise clear.

     AMERICAN FALLS, 4:40.--Signs of the exodus decreasing. Country
     strewn with household goods. Reports here that all the teams that
     went out on the roads west have not returned. Expect to hear
     something definite from Minidoka.

     MINIDOKA, 6:10.--Electrical and barometrical indications unchanged.
     Signs of life disappearing. Party in excellent spirits, and eager
     to reach the facts.

The next dispatch was from Cheyenne, and was sent at eight o'clock. It
simply said, "Nothing further heard from Government party. Wire in good
order."

Then followed two telegrams of gruesome brevity and significance:

     POCATELLO, 9 P. M.--Nothing here.

     CHEYENNE, 10 P. M.--Nothing has come over the special wire up to
     this hour. Microphonic tests at Pocatello indicate that the train
     is still moving. Electrical tests indicate that the current is
     unbroken.

Finally there was a special message from the New York _Star's_
correspondent at Cheyenne, dated 11 P. M. It was about to this effect:

     The current on the Government wire was broken at 10:40. Delicate
     tests show that the wire is now grounded. The dire conclusion of
     experts here is that the train ran from some point west of Minidoka
     from about 6:15 to 10:40 without human control, and then met with
     an accident. At the rate at which it was moving the train must have
     reached Shoshone. Terrible excitement here.

My keen sense detected in the newspaper itself certain infallible little
signs that the news had disturbed the precision and routine of the
office. Lines of type were in the wrong place, and typographical errors
made it difficult to get the exact sense. Dispatch after dispatch, all
bearing the same import of panic, was huddled into the column. From St.
Louis the announcement was:

     An unprecedented excitement here over the news from Cheyenne. The
     authorities appear to have lost their heads, and are unable to
     preserve order. Eastward-bound trains are carrying away people at a
     mob rate. We are in the midst of chaos.

From Chicago the intelligence was similarly appalling. "A panic prevails
here," said the dispatch. "Impelled by a senseless apprehension of
disaster, people have lost their reason. The Mayor has just issued a
call upon the best citizens to assist him in preserving order."

It required no news expert to see that all the issues of life were
temporarily suspended by the tremendous and growing interest in this
stupendous mystery. Channels of news worn smooth by the placid streams
of everyday platitudes began to show the roll of this new freshet. A
dispatch from Washington was unintentionally significant. It read like
this: "The only explanation forwarded by Colonel Sandford of the
abandonment of the Pike's Peak signal station by himself and party is
that of a coward. He says the wind pressure indicated that the place
would speedily become untenable."

I turned over the sheet in which these disheartening facts were
presented and looked at the editorial page. There was a double-leaded
leader, evidently written late at night, and its conclusions were more
gruesome than the facts, for while the facts could be interpreted in
various ways according to the reader's condition of mind, there was no
mistaking the official tone of the editor whose business it was to weigh
and estimate the public value of news. It seemed to me that this umpire
to whom we instinctively looked for opinions had thrown up the sponge,
so to speak. Let me recall his words as they were impressed upon me that
morning:

     That a grave crisis has arrived in the conditions of life on this
     planet, it would be folly and is impossible any longer to deny. It
     is not our province nor is it within our power to offer any
     solution of the stupendous mystery that is now enveloping a part of
     our continent. It is only imperative upon us, as brave agents in
     the dispensing of truth, to say, with all the candor that we can
     summon, that the effort of the Government to open communication
     with the vast region west of what must now be known as the Meridian
     of Silence has dismally failed, and it is the conviction of the
     maturest judgment, based upon all the facts of the attempt that are
     obtainable, that it failed because the explorers themselves ceased
     to exist when they had passed a certain pretty well-defined line
     which we now know extends north and south from Helena in Montana to
     Yuma on the borders of Mexico.

I found myself standing by my breakfast table reading this. I had risen
unconsciously. My breakfast was unheeded. An ungovernable impulse to go
anywhere seized me. To sit still with this crushing uncertainty was
impossible. I found myself in a coupe. Where I got it I do not
distinctly remember. But I do remember that it was by means of an
extraordinary offer to the driver, who, like all his fellows, was
dashing through the streets at a headlong pace. And I also have a very
clear recollection of the strange nervous effect produced upon me by
seeing the people along the curbs on Broadway watching the flying
vehicles with a mute terror, as if the very recklessness of the drivers
afforded them a palpable distraction from the unintelligible weight of
their own fears. I speedily noticed that the stream of humanity on the
streets was tending down town, and almost immediately I understood that
it was heading, like myself, for the news centers. I could get no
farther than Chambers Street, owing to the block of people and vehicles,
and the driver rudely refused to take the risk of a jam. I looked at the
City Hall clock. It was only eight. My heart was beating rapidly, and I
knew enough of the effect of emotion on the cardiac system to understand
that it was caused by suspense. A thousand new terrors were in the air
of which the experience and the sagacity of man were ignorant. I forced
my way with the greatest difficulty across the park, which was full of
restless but strangely mute people, and got near enough to the newspaper
bulletins to read the painted lines. They were feverishly indicative of
the cross currents of excitement in the country, and were in short,
decisive sentences like this: "The President asked to appoint a day of
humiliation and prayer immediately. The Governor of Colorado, crazed by
the excitement, commits suicide. Mob rule in Chicago. Rioting in Denver.
Breakdown of the Alton & Chicago road. Unparalleled scenes at El Paso.
Fanaticism in New Orleans. The Christian pastors of this city will meet
at Cooper Union at ten o'clock, irrespective of sect. Panic in
Milwaukee."

Held by a numbing sort of fascination, I read these sentences over and
over. Across Printing House Square, on another bulletin, in big black
letters I saw the line, "It baffles the world. Has annihilation set in!"
There was something weird in the use of the pronoun IT. It seemed to be
man's last effort in language to express a mystery that was specific and
yet incomprehensible, and I found that by the common consent of
ignorance men were referring to the phenomenon as IT. I looked at the
strained, anxious faces of the mob, and a great fear fell upon me. With
it came an awful reproach. I would go instantly and redeem my word to
Kate by securing passages to Europe. I had to fight my way by inches out
of the stolid and frightened crowd to the steamship office on lower
Broadway, and there I found another jam. The street was full of private
carriages, and it was impossible to get anywhere near the entrance to
the office. I saw a policeman who was on the outside of the press, and
who was walking up and down in a restless and unofficial manner. "What
is the matter here?" I asked him. He looked me all over, as if he
suspected that I had fallen out of the clouds. Then he said: "Tryin' to
get tickets for Europe! Where d' you come frum?" and then, after a
restless turn or two he added as he passed me, "But it ain't no use,
'cause there ain't steamships enough in the world!"

Then it was, I think, that the whole terrible truth first lit my
consciousness like the sudden upflaring of a bale fire. The inhabitants
were fleeing from the country. They were all affected as had been the
Brisbanes. I was the only dolt and idiot and liar who had no instincts
of danger, and who had failed to rescue the woman I loved when she had
appealed to me.

Then I plunged wildly out into the street with a feeling of desperation
and that sinking of the spirits that comes only in the worst crises and
when one begins to comprehend how helpless man is. I saw that in the
brief time that had elapsed a change had taken place in the aspect of
the crowds. When I got to Broadway again it was with the utmost
difficulty that I could make my way at all against the surging mass of
people that seemed momentarily to swell. It was utterly unlike any crowd
in numbers and disposition that I had ever encountered. It was made up
of all classes. It had lost that American characteristic of good-humor,
which had been swallowed up in a dire personal and selfish instinct of
self-preservation. It was animated by a vague terror, and disregarded
every consideration but that of personal safety. A horrible conviction
seized me that the ordinary restraints of society were breaking down,
and that speedily panic would mount to chaos. I saw that this dread was
adding to the terror of everybody, aside from the fear of IT. Like an
assemblage in a burning building, the fear of each other was more
subtile and operative than the fear of the elements. By indefatigable
labor I got off the main thoroughfare and reached Hudson Street, and
here in the crowd I learned the latest news and discovered the cause of
the rapidly increasing excitement. I had run against an intimate friend
and associate, by accident. His first words were, as he wiped the
perspiration out of his eyes, "Well, this is awful, eh?"

"What's the news?" I asked.

"The latest is that The Death Line has moved. The Thurbers have a
private wire, and I just heard that Denver is cut off now! It looks as
if it was every man for himself."

So terrible was this announcement, and so engrossed was I with the
despairing thoughts that it gave rise to, that I took little heed of
what was going on about me until I reached Canal Street. The one dull
conviction that it was useless to fight against now was that
annihilation had set in; that some destroying wave had started out to
encircle the globe and that the race was doomed. Something, God alone
knew what, had happened to our planet, and humanity was to be swept away
in one of those cataclysms with which soulless Nature prepares for a new
order of existence.

I was rudely awakened from this reverie of wretchedness by the crowd
which surged against me with a blind, unvindictive violence. My one
desire was to get uptown to the woman I loved and had neglected, and I
saw that every minute was adding to the difficulty.

How I reached the Brevoort House I do not know. But there I found a
number of citizens who had not utterly lost their heads, and who had
come together for counsel. There was a private wire in the house, and
they were receiving intelligence from several central points in the
city. The looks of these men, who were huddled into the parlor, were
enough to dismay the most resolute observer. Their pale faces and
painfully set mouths indicated the sense of an awful crisis which wisdom
did not know how to meet or avoid. A well-known citizen read the
dispatches to them as they were received, and torn as I was by
impatience, my curiosity held me there to hear. It was now about
half-past eleven in the morning. The rapidity with which events had
moved since I got up was made startlingly apparent by the information
here furnished. The authorities, together with a number of influential
citizens, had come together as if by a common instinct at the Fifth
Avenue Hotel. The Mayor, the Police and Fire Commissioners, several
wealthy bankers, and a number of prominent clergymen were holding some
kind of council and sending out appeals for co-operation and addresses
to the public, which latter were entirely unheeded. As I forced myself
into the room I saw and heard a venerable and majestic gentleman,
evidently a clergyman, addressing those present in an impassioned
manner. There were tears in his eyes and an awful sadness in his voice.
"Men and brethren," he said, "it is appointed unto all men once to die.
If it be appointed unto us who remain to die together, let us die like
Christians who still retain our faith in eternal justice and eternal
mercy, and not like wild beasts that devour each other."

A report came that the fatal east wind was blowing. And at this there
was a general movement of those present, as if the time were too short
to waste in longer listening. I came up Lafayette Place to Astor Place
with the intention of reaching Fourth Avenue. Both spaces were choked
with people, and on Eighth Street I saw a woman on the steps of a
private residence, wildly calling on the mob, which paid no attention to
her, to repent, for the day of judgment was at hand. Her white hair was
blown over her face and her arms were frantically gesticulating. Into
the great hall of the Cooper Union a mass of religious people had
flocked, and a number of speakers were making addresses and offering up
prayers. When I passed the woman who was exhorting the crowd I had
noticed the manner in which her hair, which was of soft, flossy white,
streamed out straight in front of her, but it did not occur to me until
I reached the square in front of the Cooper Union that this was caused
by the peculiar and ominous draft of wind from the east of which I had
heard so much, for it was there that I saw a crowd pointing up to the
roof of the vast building known as the Bible House, which appeared to be
covered with people. Some of them were holding flags and drapery, and
the material floated out westward without any of the undulating motion
which always marks a flag in a disturbed current. These extemporized
pennants stood out as if they were starched. I could see that this sign
produced a dumb sort of terror in the crowd. It seemed to me then that
all emotion of which I was capable was centered in the one desire to get
to the woman I loved and die with her. A crushing and at the same time
an animating remorse, as if somehow I had been responsible for her death
at least, in disregarding her warnings, and somehow doubly guilty in
mistrusting her motives, unmanned me and inflamed me. It was with
something of the same disregard of everybody but oneself that I had seen
in others that I fought my way to Twenty-first Street. What brutalities
I committed need not be recounted. That hour remains with me an acute
and jangled memory of frenzy. I reached the steps of Judge Brisbane's
house torn and bleeding. The terrible scenes were in my eyes, and the
dreadful, monotonous tumult of human desperation--that vast sigh of
doomed humanity, pierced here and there by the wails and shrieks of
despair and the cries of innocence for help, was in my ears. The
celerity with which it had all come on left no chance for cool reason.
An invisible phantom was at the heels of the community and we were part
of a mighty stampede. After fumbling for an instant at the bell and
pushing back several ghastly creatures who were on the steps, I must
have applied my shoulder to the door and pushed it in. Some one appeared
to be resisting on the other side, but it gave way and I half fell into
Judge Brisbane's vestibule. An instant later we were looking into each
other's faces, I, bloody and soiled and ragged and wild with the frenzy
of fear and impatience; he, pale as death, but resolute, and holding an
enormous bar over me.

"Quick!" he said. "Help me fasten this door!"

That sudden call of duty struck something habitual in me, and, without
knowing exactly what I was doing, I found myself assisting him in
barricading the door. The endeavor somewhat changed the current of my
thoughts from the danger that was unseen to the danger that was storming
under our windows. I must have muttered some kind of excuse for my
conduct to the Judge, for he said: "No time for apologies or
recriminations now. The house is full of my neighbors, who have come
here for protection. Go upstairs and look after the women. The best and
only thing we can do is to preserve a quiet place to die in, and not be
trampled to pieces. Are you armed?"

I dashed up the broad staircase, and found the upper rooms occupied by
women, some of whom, in morning attire hastily thrown on, were sitting
around with their heads in their hands, while others were huddled at the
windows, staring with strained looks of terror at the crowds on the
street. Walking up and down the room, wringing his hands, a middle-aged
man was giving expression to the most terrible irony and cowardice,
without reference to his listeners.

I ran my eye over the huddled groups of frightened women. The one I
sought was not there. I flew through the groaning figures on the
stairway up to her chamber. I knocked loudly, and called her by name
passionately. Then I listened. I heard nothing but the dull sounds of
the human tumult that came through the open casement, and the sighing
tones of the telegraph wires as the steady draft from the east swept
through them. I shook the door, and abjured her to come to me. Then in
my madness I burst it in. She was on her knees at the bed, with her
hands on her ears, and her head buried in the bedclothes. I fell down on
my knees beside her, and put my arm around her. "Kate," I said, "we will
die together. Look up. Love at least is eternal." She was cold. I caught
her head between my hands, and turned her beautiful face toward me. My
God, she was dead! Dead, with her staring eyes full of terror, and her
beautiful mouth set in hard and ghastly lines. Then it was that I felt
rise up within me for the first time the rebellious bitterness of the
natural man. Need I tell you that at such moments man is little better
than an animal, save in his free agency that enables him to defy? I
passed hours there--moaning, cursing, bewailing. When at last the force
of the paroxysm had expended itself, I shook my fist in the face of
heaven, with the obduracy of Pagan Greek, and said: "Come on now, you
envious Fates, and do your worst speedily, or I will be too quick for
you!"

Judge Brisbane found me there, raving.

"Do you know?" I asked.

"Yes," he answered, "and I am grateful. She is spared much that we must
endure."

"And so," I said, "life, love, and the vaunted future of the race end in
mockery."

"It seems so," he replied. "But we cannot be sure. Come with me."

We ascended to the roof. The spectacle that greeted us was
indescribable. The tops of all the houses were black with people, who
were staring mutely and with childish terror into the West. The steady,
subdued organ tone of the rushing atmosphere could now be heard above
all else. We stood there in silence a few moments, and then I said,
"It's terrible. What do you suppose is taking place?"

"I suppose," replied the Judge, "that we are losing our atmosphere.
Reeling it off, so to speak, slowly, as we revolve. Our planet has
entered some portion of the ethereal space where the conditions are
sucking us dry of oxygen. As it recedes from the earth the water
disappears, and we shall be left to revolve like the moon, without air
and without liquid, and consequently without life."

He said this meditatively, less as if he were answering my question than
if he were formulating his own fears.

"Then," I remarked, "if this takes place gradually, the millions have
got to struggle and writhe and fight together in suffocation. We can at
least blow our brains out and cheat such a fate."

"I should hate," said the Judge, "to think that the man who was to marry
Kate had not the bravery to face his destiny."

That was all that was said. We came down, and some ripples of
intelligence reached us during the afternoon from one or two persons who
made their way into the house. We learned that in the frenzy of fear the
populace were committing the most extraordinary excesses. The shore line
of the Atlantic was crowded with people, many of whom plunged into the
ocean in the vain attempt to get away. The scenes in the city were too
revolting to narrate, for a large class of the community, released from
all restraint of moral and civil law, were bent on securing all the
lawless pleasures that force could command, during the few hours that
was left to them. And the line was steadily coming East. Chicago was cut
off at twelve o'clock. And at four intelligence had ceased coming from
Buffalo. At this time the sound of the winds was like the roar of the
sea. I had torn myself away from the window where I had been staring at
the now packed and struggling masses of people, and had locked myself in
the room with the dead body of Kate. There was a vial of opium on her
table that had been used for neuralgia; I swallowed it, and sat down by
the bedside. I know not how long I remained there. But a loud report, as
of a discharged cannon, roused me. I remember staggering and panting in
the dark, with a semi-consciousness that the end had come, and I now
know that report was occasioned by the bursting of the drums of my ears.

I remember nothing more. I have given you a plain statement of my
experiences in that crisis, and I dare say they are uneventful enough by
the side of the experiences of millions.

